

--- PAGE 1 ---
Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 29, Number 3—Summer 2015—Pages 3–30
T
here have been periodic warnings in the last two centuries that automation 
and new technology were going to wipe out large numbers of middle class 
jobs. The best-known early example is the Luddite movement of the early 
19th century, in which a group of English textile artisans protested the automation 
of textile production by seeking to destroy some of the machines. A lesser-known 
but more recent example is the concern over “The Automation Jobless,” as they 
were called in the title of a TIME magazine story of February 24, 1961:
The number of jobs lost to more efficient machines is only part of the prob-
lem. What worries many job experts more is that automation may prevent 
the economy from creating enough new jobs. . . . Throughout industry, the 
trend has been to bigger production with a smaller work force. . . . Many of 
the losses in factory jobs have been countered by an increase in the service 
industries or in office jobs. But automation is beginning to move in and elimi-
nate office jobs too. . . . In the past, new industries hired far more people 
than those they put out of business. But this is not true of many of today’s 
new industries. . . . Today’s new industries have comparatively few jobs for 
the unskilled or semiskilled, just the class of workers whose jobs are being 
eliminated by automation.
Concerns over automation and joblessness during the 1950s and early 1960s 
were strong enough that in 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson empaneled a 
Why Are There Still So Many Jobs? 
The History and Future of Workplace 
Automation
†
■ David H. Autor is Professor of Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. From 2009 to 2014, he was Editor of the Journal of Economic Perspectives.
† To access the Data Appendix and disclosure statement, visit
http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/jep.29.3.3 doi=10.1257/jep.29.3.3
David H. Autor

--- PAGE 2 ---
4     Journal of Economic Perspectives
“Blue-Ribbon National Commission on Technology, Automation, and Economic 
Progress” to confront the productivity problem of that period—specifically, the 
problem that productivity was rising so fast it might outstrip demand for labor. 
The commission ultimately concluded that automation did not threaten employ-
ment: “Thus technological change (along with other forms of economic change) is 
an important determinant of the precise places, industries, and people affected by 
unemployment. But the general level of demand for goods and services is by far the 
most important factor determining how many are affected, how long they stay unem-
ployed, and how hard it is for new entrants to the labor market to find jobs. The 
basic fact is that technology eliminates jobs, not work” (Bowen 1966, p. 9). However, 
the Commission took the reality of technological disruption as severe enough that 
it recommended, as one newspaper (The Herald Post 1966) reported, “a guaranteed 
minimum income for each family; using the government as the employer of last 
resort for the hard core jobless; two years of free education in either community 
or vocational colleges; a fully administered federal employment service, and indi-
vidual Federal Reserve Bank sponsorship in area economic development free from 
the Fed’s national headquarters.”
Such concerns have recently regained prominence. In their widely discussed book 
The Second Machine Age, MIT scholars Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014, 
p. 11) offer an unsettling picture of the likely effects of automation on employment:
Rapid and accelerating digitization is likely to bring economic rather than 
environmental disruption, stemming from the fact that as computers get more 
powerful, companies have less need for some kinds of workers. Technological 
progress is going to leave behind some people, perhaps even a lot of people, 
as it races ahead. As we’ll demonstrate, there’s never been a better time to be a 
worker with special skills or the right education, because these people can use 
technology to create and capture value. However, there’s never been a worse 
time to be a worker with only ‘ordinary’ skills and abilities to offer, because 
computers, robots, and other digital technologies are acquiring these skills 
and abilities at an extraordinary rate.
Clearly, the past two centuries of automation and technological progress have 
not made human labor obsolete: the employment‐to‐population ratio rose during 
the 20th century even as women moved from home to market; and although the 
unemployment rate fluctuates cyclically, there is no apparent long-run increase. But 
those concerned about automation and employment are quick to point out that 
past interactions between automation and employment cannot settle arguments 
about how these elements might interact in the future: in particular, the emergence 
of greatly improved computing power, artificial intelligence, and robotics raises the 
possibility of replacing labor on a scale not previously observed. There is no funda-
mental economic law that guarantees every adult will be able to earn a living solely 
on the basis of sound mind and good character. Whatever the future holds, the 
present clearly offers a resurgence of automation anxiety (Akst 2013).

--- PAGE 3 ---
David H. Autor     5
In this essay, I begin by identifying the reasons that automation has not wiped 
out a majority of jobs over the decades and centuries. Automation does indeed 
substitute for labor—as it is typically intended to do. However, automation also 
complements labor, raises output in ways that lead to higher demand for labor, and 
interacts with adjustments in labor supply. Indeed, a key observation of the paper 
is that journalists and even expert commentators tend to overstate the extent of 
machine substitution for human labor and ignore the strong complementarities 
between automation and labor that increase productivity, raise earnings, and 
augment demand for labor.
Changes in technology do alter the types of jobs available and what those jobs 
pay. In the last few decades, one noticeable change has been “polarization” of the 
labor market, in which wage gains went disproportionately to those at the top and 
at the bottom of the income and skill distribution, not to those in the middle. I will 
offer some evidence on this phenomenon. However, I will also argue that this polar-
ization is unlikely to continue very far into the foreseeable future.
The final section of this paper reflects on how recent and future advances in arti-
ficial intelligence and robotics should shape our thinking about the likely trajectory 
of occupational change and employment growth. I argue that the interplay between 
machine and human comparative advantage allows computers to substitute for workers 
in performing routine, codifiable tasks while amplifying the comparative advantage of 
workers in supplying problem-solving skills, adaptability, and creativity. The frontier 
of automation is rapidly advancing, and the challenges to substituting machines for 
workers in tasks requiring flexibility, judgment, and common sense remain immense. 
In many cases, machines both substitute for and complement human labor. Focusing 
only on what is lost misses a central economic mechanism by which automation affects 
the demand for labor: raising the value of the tasks that workers uniquely supply.
How Automation and Employment Interact
In 1900, 41 percent of the US workforce was employed in agriculture; by 
2000, that share had fallen to 2 percent (Autor 2014), mostly due to a wide range 
of technologies including automated machinery. The mass-produced automo-
bile drastically reduced demand for many equestrian occupations, including 
blacksmiths and stable hands. Successive waves of earth-moving equipment and 
powered tools displaced manual labor from construction. In more recent years, 
when a computer processes a company’s payroll, alphabetizes a list of names, or 
tabulates the age distribution of residents in each Census enumeration district, 
it is replacing a task that a human would have done in a previous era. Broadly 
speaking, many—perhaps most—workplace technologies are designed to save 
labor. Whether the technology is tractors, assembly lines, or spreadsheets, 
the first-order goal is to substitute mechanical power for human musculature, 
machine-consistency for human handiwork, and digital calculation for slow and 
error-prone “wetware.”

--- PAGE 4 ---
6     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Given that these technologies demonstrably succeed in their labor saving 
objective and, moreover, that we invent many more labor-saving technologies all 
the time, should we not be somewhat surprised that technological change hasn’t 
already wiped out employment for the vast majority of workers? Why doesn’t auto-
mation necessarily reduce aggregate employment, even as it demonstrably reduces 
labor requirements per unit of output produced?
These questions underline an economic reality that is as fundamental as it is over-
looked: tasks that cannot be substituted by automation are generally complemented 
by it. Most work processes draw upon a multifaceted set of inputs: labor and capital; 
brains and brawn; creativity and rote repetition; technical mastery and intuitive judg-
ment; perspiration and inspiration; adherence to rules and judicious application of 
discretion. Typically, these inputs each play essential roles; that is, improvements in 
one do not obviate the need for the other. If so, productivity improvements in one set 
of tasks almost necessarily increase the economic value of the remaining tasks.
An iconic representation of this idea is found in the O-ring production function 
studied by Kremer (1993).
1 In the O-ring model, failure of any one step in the chain 
of production leads the entire production process to fail. Conversely, improvements 
in the reliability of any given link increase the value of improvements in all of the 
others. Intuitively, if n − 1 links in the chain are reasonably likely to fail, the fact 
that link n is somewhat unreliable is of little consequence. If the other n − 1 links 
are made reliable, then the value of making link n more reliable as well rises. Analo-
gously, when automation or computerization makes some steps in a work process 
more reliable, cheaper, or faster, this increases the value of the remaining human 
links in the production chain.
As a contemporary example, consider the surprising complementarities between 
information technology and employment in banking, specifically the experience with 
automated teller machines (ATMs) and bank tellers documented by Bessen (2015). 
ATMs were introduced in the 1970s, and their numbers in the US economy quadrupled 
from approximately 100,000 to 400,000 between 1995 and 2010. One might naturally 
assume that these machines had all but eliminated bank tellers in that interval. But 
US bank teller employment actually rose modestly from 500,000 to approximately 
550,000 over the 30-year period from 1980 to 2010 (although given the growth in the 
labor force in this time interval, these numbers do imply that bank tellers declined 
as a share of overall US employment). With the growth of ATMs, what are all of these 
tellers doing? Bessen observes that two forces worked in opposite directions. First, by 
reducing the cost of operating a bank branch, ATMs indirectly increased the demand 
for tellers: the number of tellers per branch fell by more than a third between 1988 
and 2004, but the number of urban bank branches (also encouraged by a wave of 
1 The name of the O-ring production function refers to the 1986 accident of Space Shuttle Challenger, 
which exploded and crashed back to earth less than two minutes after takeoff, killing its seven crew 
members. The proximate cause of the Challenger crash was an inexpensive and seemingly inconsequen-
tial rubber O-ring seal in one of its booster rockets that failed after hardening and cracking during the 
icy Florida weather on the night before takeoff.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Why Are There Still So Many Jobs?     7
bank deregulation allowing more branches) rose by more than 40 percent. Second, 
as the routine cash-handling tasks of bank tellers receded, information technology 
also enabled a broader range of bank personnel to become involved in “relationship 
banking.” Increasingly, banks recognized the value of tellers enabled by information 
technology, not primarily as checkout clerks, but as salespersons, forging relation-
ships with customers and introducing them to additional bank services like credit 
cards, loans, and investment products.
This example should not be taken as paradigmatic; technological change is not 
necessarily employment-increasing or Pareto-improving. Three main factors can 
mitigate or augment its impacts. First, workers are more likely to benefit directly 
from automation if they supply tasks that are complemented by automation, but 
not if they primarily (or exclusively) supply tasks that are substituted. A construc-
tion worker who is expert with a shovel but cannot drive an excavator will generally 
experience falling wages as automation advances. Similarly, a bank teller who can 
tally currency but cannot provide “relationship banking” is unlikely to fare well at a 
modern bank.
Second, the elasticity of labor supply can mitigate wage gains. If the complemen-
tary tasks that construction workers or relationship bankers supply are abundantly 
available elsewhere in the economy, then it is plausible that a flood of new workers 
will temper any wage gains that would emanate from complementarities between 
automation and human labor input. While these kinds of supply effects will prob-
ably not offset productivity-driven wage gains fully, one can find extreme examples: 
Hsieh and Moretti (2003) document that new entry into the real estate broker occu-
pation in response to rising house prices fully offsets average wage gains that would 
otherwise have occurred.
Third, the output elasticity of demand combined with income elasticity of  
demand can either dampen or amplify the gains from automation. In the case  
of agricultural products over the long run, spectacular productivity improvements 
have been accompanied by declines in the share of household income spent on food. 
In other cases, such as the health care sector, improvements in technology have led 
to ever-larger shares of income being spent on health. Even if the elasticity of final 
demand for a given sector is below unity—meaning that the sector shrinks as produc-
tivity rises—this does not imply that aggregate demand falls as technology advances; 
clearly, the surplus income can be spent elsewhere. As passenger cars displaced eques-
trian travel and the myriad occupations that supported it in the 1920s, the roadside 
motel and fast food industries rose up to serve the “motoring public” ( Jackson 1993). 
Rising income may also spur demand for activities that have nothing to do with the 
technological vanguard. Production of restaurant meals, cleaning services, haircare, 
and personal fitness is neither strongly complemented nor substituted by current 
technologies; these sectors are “technologically lagging” in Baumol’s (1967) phrase. 
But demand for these goods appears strongly income-elastic, so that rising produc-
tivity in technologically leading sectors may boost employment nevertheless in these 
activities. Ultimately, this outcome requires that the elasticity of substitution between 
leading and lagging sectors is less than or equal to unity (Autor and Dorn 2013).

--- PAGE 6 ---
8     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Over the very long run, gains in productivity have not led to a shortfall of 
demand for goods and services: instead, household consumption has largely kept 
pace with household incomes. We know this because the share of the population 
engaged in paid employment has generally risen over (at least) the past century 
despite vast improvements in material standards of living. An average US worker in 
2015 wishing to live at the income level of an average worker in 1915 could roughly 
achieve this goal by working about 17 weeks per year.
2 Most citizens would not 
consider this tradeoff between hours and income desirable, however, suggesting 
that consumption demands have risen along with productivity. Of course, citizens 
in high-income countries work fewer annual hours, take more vacations, and retire 
earlier (relative to death) than a century ago—implying that they choose to spend 
part of their rising incomes on increased leisure. This is clearly good news on many 
fronts, but does it also imply that consumption demands are approaching satia-
tion? I think not. In high-income countries, consumption and leisure appear to be 
complements; citizens spend much of their leisure time consuming—shopping, 
traveling, dining, and, less pleasantly, obtaining medical care.
3
What about the Marxian concern that automation will immiserate workers by 
obviating the demand for labor? In simple economic models, this outcome cannot 
really occur because capital is owned by the economic agents who are presumably 
also the workers; but, alternatively, the returns could accrue to a narrow subset of 
agents. Sachs and Kotlikoff (2012) and Sachs, Benzell, and LaGarda (2015) explore 
multigenerational economic environments in which a burst of robotic productivity 
can enrich one generation of capital owners at the expense of future generations. 
These later generations suffer because the fruits of the productivity surge are 
consumed by the old, while the young face diminished demand for their labor and, 
in some cases, also experience credit constraints that inhibit their human capital 
investments. In these models, the fundamental threat is not technology per se but 
misgovernance; an appropriate capital tax will render the technological advance 
broadly welfare-improving, as these papers stress. Thus, a key takeaway is that rapid 
automation may create distributional challenges that invite a broad policy response, 
a point to which I will return.
2 Douglas (1930; reproduced in US Bureau of the Census 1949) reports average annual earnings across 
all sectors in 1915 at $633. Inflating this to 2015 dollars using the US Bureau of Labor Statistics historical 
Consumer Price Index calculator yields a current dollar equivalent of $14,711. The BLS employment 
report from April 2015 reports mean weekly private nonfarm earnings of $858. Thus, it would take 
17 weeks of work at the average US weekly wage to earn a full-time annual 1915 income.
3 This outcome is a modern version of the “coal paradox” posed by William Stanley Jevons in his 1865 
book The Coal Question . Jevons argued that as we became more efficient in mining coal, we would use 
more of it, not less. Modern environmental economists term this idea the “rebound effect.” In this discus-
sion, the broad parallel is that greater efficiency of production of all goods and services means that we 
consume more of them, not the same or less.

--- PAGE 7 ---
David H. Autor     9
Polarization in the US Labor Market
Even if automation does not reduce the quantity of jobs, it may greatly affect the 
qualities of jobs available. For the three decades or so from the end of World War II 
and up through the late 1970s, the US experienced rapid automation and tech-
nological change—inspiring, for example, the TIME  magazine story in 1961 and 
Lyndon Johnson’s 1964 National Commission mentioned earlier. While it’s diffi-
cult to paint an accurate picture of occupational change over a large time interval, 
Figure 1, which draws from Katz and Margo (2014), provides a high-level overview 
by depicting the average change per decade in employment for seven broad occu-
pational categories, ranked from lowest to highest paid, for two periods: 1940–1980 
and 1980–2010. In the first four decades after World War II, the thrust of occupa-
tional change skewed strongly away from physically demanding, dangerous, and 
Figure 1 
Average Change per Decade in US Occupational Employment Shares for  
Two Periods: 1940–1980 and 1980–2010
Source: Based on Katz and Margo (2014), table 1.6, panel A, which is based upon the 1920 through 2000 
Census of population IPUMS and 2010 American Community Survey.
Notes: Observed long changes in US occupational employment shares over 1940–1980 and 1980–2010 
are scaled by the number of intervening decades to yield average change per decade. Occupations are 
classified into occupational groups based on 1950 occupation codes using the consistent coding of 
occupations in all years into 1950 codes (the OCC1950 variable) in the IPUMS. Additional details are 
found in Katz and Margo (2014, p. 46).
−4.0
−3.5
−3.0
−2.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Agricultural
occupations
Service
occupations
Operative/
laborers
Clerical/salesSkilled blue 
collar (craft)
Managers Professionals/
technicals
1940–1980
1980–2010

--- PAGE 8 ---
10     Journal of Economic Perspectives
menial work and towards skilled blue- and white-collar work. Agricultural employ-
ment declined by almost 4 percentage points per decade. Professional, technical, 
and managerial employment—the highest skill categories—grew by 3 percentage 
points per decade (2.5 for the professionals and technicians plus 0.5 for the 
managers). And among the vast middle group of workers between agriculture (at 
the bottom) and professional, technical, and managerial (the three groups at the 
top), service and skilled blue-collar occupations were stable, clerical/sales occupa-
tions rose, and operative and laborer occupations fell sharply.
Thus, physically demanding, repetitive, dangerous, and cognitively monot-
onous work was receding, ushered out by extraordinary productivity gains in 
agriculture. Rising consumer affluence spurred demand for manufactured goods 
and leisure complements. Growth of technologically intensive corporations, 
health care services, and higher education created employment for credentialed 
professionals and a cadre of supporting clerical, administrative, and sales workers. 
Though automation was clearly reducing labor demand across a large swath of 
occupations, it is easy to see why overall job prospects appeared broadly favorable 
during this period.
But after the late 1970s, these favorable winds slowed and in some cases 
reversed. While jobs at the top of the skill ladder—professional, technical, and 
managerial occupations—grew even more rapidly between 1980 and 2010 than 
in the four decades prior, positive occupational shifts outside of these catego-
ries mostly halted. Skilled blue-collar occupations shrank rapidly and clerical and 
sales occupations—the vulnerable “production jobs” of the information age—
sharply reversed course. While physically demanding operative and laborer jobs 
continued to atrophy, low-paid personal services began absorbing an increasing 
share of noncollege labor. By this time, the vast movement away from agricultural 
work had already played out.
Many forces distinguish the labor markets of these two epochs of 1940–1980 
and 1980–2010: a partial list would include changes in the relative supply of college 
and noncollege labor, rising trade penetration, offshoring, and globalization of 
production chains, declines in labor union penetration, the changing “bite” of the 
minimum wage, and certain shifts in tax policy. Of course, many of these factors 
combine and interact as well such that attributing changes to a single cause would be 
foolish. However, my focus here is on the effects of technological change, and espe-
cially information technology, on employment and occupations (and later wages). 
To understand the role that information technology has played (and may play), it 
is useful to start from first principles: What do computers do? And how does their 
widespread adoption change what workers do?
Fundamentally, computers follow procedures meticulously laid out by program-
mers. The typical pattern has been that for a computer to accomplish a task, a 
programmer must first fully understand the sequence of steps required to perform 
that task, and then must write a program that, in effect, causes the machine to simu-
late these steps precisely. (The field of machine learning, discussed below, provides 
an interesting exception to this process.) When a computer processes a company’s 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Why Are There Still So Many Jobs?     11
payroll, alphabetizes a list of names, or tabulates the age distribution of residents  
in each Census enumeration district, it is “simulating” a work process that would, in  
a previous era, have been done by humans using nearly identical procedures. The 
principle of computer simulation of workplace tasks has not fundamentally changed 
since the dawn of the computer era—but its cost has. An ingenious 2007 paper 
by William Nordhaus estimates that the cost of performing a standardized set of 
computations has fallen by at least 1.7 trillion-fold since the manual computing era, 
with most of that decline occurring since 1980. Thus, firms have strong economic 
incentives to substitute ever-cheaper computing power for relatively expensive 
human labor. What are the effects?
One first-order effect is, of course, substitution. As the price of computing 
power has fallen, computers and their robot cousins have increasingly displaced 
workers in accomplishing explicit, codifiable tasks. In Autor, Levy, and Murnane 
(2003), my coauthors and I label these activities as “routine tasks,” not because 
they are mundane, but because they can be fully codified and hence automated 
(see Levy and Murnane 2004 for many examples). Routine tasks are characteristic 
of many middle-skilled cognitive and manual activities: for example, the math-
ematical calculations involved in simple bookkeeping; the retrieving, sorting, 
and storing of structured information typical of clerical work; and the precise 
executing of a repetitive physical operation in an unchanging environment as in 
repetitive production tasks. Because core tasks of these occupations follow precise, 
well-understood procedures, they are increasingly codified in computer software 
and performed by machines. This force has led to a substantial decline in employ-
ment in clerical, administrative support, and to a lesser degree, in production and 
operative employment.
But the scope for this kind of substitution is bounded because there are many 
tasks that people understand tacitly and accomplish effortlessly but for which 
neither computer programmers nor anyone else can enunciate the explicit “rules” 
or procedures. I have referred to this constraint as Polanyi’s paradox, named after 
the economist, philosopher, and chemist who observed in 1966, “We know more 
than we can tell” (Polanyi 1966; Autor 2015). When we break an egg over the 
edge of a mixing bowl, identify a distinct species of birds based on a fleeting 
glimpse, write a persuasive paragraph, or develop a hypothesis to explain a poorly 
understood phenomenon, we are engaging in tasks that we only tacitly under -
stand how to perform. Following Polanyi’s observation, the tasks that have proved 
most vexing to automate are those demanding flexibility, judgment, and common 
sense—skills that we understand only tacitly.
4
Polanyi’s paradox also suggests why high-level reasoning is straightforward to 
computerize and certain sensorimotor skills are not. High-level reasoning uses a set 
4 Computer scientists often refer to this phenomenon as Moravec’s paradox, after Moravec (1988) who 
wrote, “[I]t is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult level performance on intelligence tests 
or playing checkers, and difficult or impossible to give them the skills of a one-year-old when it comes to 
perception and mobility.”

--- PAGE 10 ---
12     Journal of Economic Perspectives
of formal logical tools that were developed specifically to address formal problems: 
for example, counting, mathematics, logical deduction, and encoding quantita-
tive relationships. In contrast, sensorimotor skills, physical flexibility, common 
sense, judgment, intuition, creativity, and spoken language are capabilities that the 
human species evolved, rather than developed. Formalizing these skills requires 
reverse-engineering a set of activities that we normally accomplish using only tacit 
understanding. Hoffman and Furcht (2014) discuss the challenge that Polanyi’s 
paradox poses for scientific innovation more broadly.
If computers largely substitute for routine tasks, how do we characterize the 
nonroutine tasks for which they do not substitute? In Autor, Levy, and Murnane 
(2003), we distinguish two broad sets of tasks that have proven stubbornly challenging 
to computerize. One category includes tasks that require problem-solving capabili-
ties, intuition, creativity, and persuasion. These tasks, which we term “abstract,” are 
characteristic of professional, technical, and managerial occupations. They employ 
workers with high levels of education and analytical capability, and they place a 
premium on inductive reasoning, communications ability, and expert mastery. The 
second broad category includes tasks requiring situational adaptability, visual and 
language recognition, and in-person interactions—which we call “manual” tasks. 
Manual tasks are characteristic of food preparation and serving jobs, cleaning and 
janitorial work, grounds cleaning and maintenance, in-person health assistance by 
home health aides, and numerous jobs in security and protective services. These 
jobs tend to employ workers who are physically adept and, in some cases, able to 
communicate fluently in spoken language. While these activities are not highly 
skilled by the standards of the US labor market, they present daunting challenges 
for automation. Equally noteworthy, many outputs of these manual task jobs (hair -
cuts, fresh meals, housecleaning) must be produced and performed largely on-site 
or in person (at least for now), and hence these tasks are not subject to outsourcing. 
The potential supply of workers who can perform these jobs is very large.
Because jobs that are intensive in either abstract or manual tasks are gener -
ally found at opposite ends of the occupational skill spectrum—in professional, 
managerial, and technical occupations on the one hand, and in service and laborer 
occupations on the other—this reasoning implies that computerization of “routine” 
job tasks may lead to the simultaneous growth of high-education, high-wage jobs at 
one end and low-education, low-wage jobs at the other end, both at the expense 
of middle-wage, middle education jobs—a phenomenon that Goos and Manning 
(2003) called “job polarization.” A large body of US and international evidence 
confirms the presence of employment polarization at the level of industries, locali-
ties, and national labor markets (Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2006, 2008; Goos and 
Manning 2007; Autor and Dorn 2013; Michaels, Natraj, and Van Reenen 2014; 
Goos, Manning, and Salomons 2014; Graetz and Michaels 2015; Autor, Dorn, and 
Hanson 2015).
5
5 Mishel, Shierholz, and Schmitt (2013) offer an extended, and for the most part extremely careful, 
critique of the literature on technological change, employment, and wage inequality. Their paper argues 

--- PAGE 11 ---
David H. Autor     13
Figure 2 illustrates this pattern for the United States by plotting percentage 
point changes in employment by decade for the years 1979–2012 for ten major 
occupational groups encompassing all of US nonagricultural employment. (More 
that the growth of low-wage service employment does not commence in the United States until the 
2000s, a finding that is at odds with all other work using contemporary occupation codes of which I am 
aware (including the Bureau of Labor Statistic’s own tabulations of Occupational Employment Statistics 
data for this time period provided in Alpert and Auyer 2003, table 1). At a methodological level, work in 
this area always requires adjustments and judgment calls in comparing occupational data across Census 
years, but the adjustments that Mishel et al. apply to the data generate occupational patterns that appear 
anomalous. Substantively, I believe the main issue is not whether employment polarization has occurred—
on this, the evidence appears unambiguous—but the extent to which these occupational employment 
shifts are helpful for understanding wage polarization or wage inequality more broadly.
Figure 2 
Change in Employment by Major Occupational Category, 1979–2012 
(the y-axis plots 100 times log changes in employment, which is nearly equivalent to 
percentage points for small changes)
Sources: Author using data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census IPUMS files, American Community Survey 
combined file 2006–2008, and American Community Survey 2012. The sample includes the working-age 
(16–64) civilian noninstitutionalized population. Employment is measured as full-time equivalent workers.
Notes: Figure 2 plots percentage point changes in employment (more precisely, the figure plots 100 times 
log changes in employment, which is close to equivalent to percentage points for small changes) by decade 
for the years 1979–2012 for ten major occupational groups encompassing all of US nonagricultural 
employment. Agricultural occupations comprise no more than 2.2 percent of employment in this time 
interval, so this omission has a negligible effect.
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
100 × log Change in Employment
Personal careFood/cleaning serviceProtective serviceOperators/laborersProductionOfﬁce/adminSales Technician
s
ProfessionalsManager
s
1979–1989 1989–1999 1999–2007 2007–2012

--- PAGE 12 ---
14     Journal of Economic Perspectives
precisely, the figure plots 100 times log changes in employment, which are close 
to equivalent to percentage points for small changes. Agricultural occupations 
comprise no more than 2.2 percent of employment in this time interval, so this 
omission has a negligible effect.) These ten occupations can be divided into 
three groups. On the right-hand side of the figure are managerial, professional, 
and technical occupations, which are highly educated and highly paid. Moving 
leftward, the next four columns display employment growth in middle-skill occu-
pations, comprising sales; office and administrative support; production, craft 
and repair; and operator, fabricator, and laborer. The leftmost three columns of 
Figure 2 depict employment trends in service occupations, defined by the Census 
Bureau as jobs that involve helping, caring for, or assisting others. The majority 
of workers in service occupations have no post-secondary education, and average 
hourly wages in service occupations are in most cases below the other seven occu-
pational categories.
As Figure 2 illustrates, the rapid employment growth in both high- and 
low-education jobs has substantially reduced the share of employment accounted 
for by “middle-skill” jobs. In 1979, the four middle-skill occupations (sales; office 
and administrative workers; production workers; and operatives) accounted for 
60 percent of employment. In 2007, this number was 49 percent, and in 2012, it 
was 46 percent. The employment share of service occupations was essentially flat 
between 1959 and 1979, and so their rapid growth since 1980 marks a sharp trend 
reversal (Autor and Dorn 2013).
The polarization of employment across occupations is not unique to the 
United States. Figure 3 plots changes in the share of employment between 1993 
and 2010 within three broad sets of occupations—low-, middle-, and high-wage—
covering all nonagricultural employment in 16 European Union economies. In all 
countries, middle-wage occupations declined as a share of employment while both 
high-wage and low-wage occupations increased their shares of employment over 
this 17-year period. While the US and EU data are not precisely comparable, the 
US economy would fall roughly in the middle of the pack of this set of countries 
in terms of its employment polarization. The comparability of these occupational 
shifts across a large set of developed countries makes it likely that a common set 
of forces contributes to these shared labor-market developments. Simultaneously, 
the substantial differences among countries underscores that no single factor or 
common cause explains the diversity of experiences across the United States and 
the European Union.
Does Employment Polarization Lead to Wage Polarization?
From the barbell shape of occupational employment growth depicted in 
Figures 2 and 3, one might surmise that occupational polarization would also cata-
lyze wage polarization—that is, rising relative wages in both high-education, abstract 
task-intensive jobs and in low-education, manual task-intensive jobs. However, this 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Why Are There Still So Many Jobs?     15
reasoning does not take into account the role played by the three mitigating forces 
discussed above: complementarity, demand elasticity, and labor supply.
Let’s first consider the effect of computerization on wages in abstract task-intensive 
occupations such as managerial, professional, and technical occupations. These occu-
pations all draw upon large bodies of constantly evolving expertise: for example, 
medical knowledge, legal precedents, sales data, financial analysis, programming 
languages, and economic statistics. Information technology and computerization 
should strongly complement workers performing abstract task-intensive jobs. By 
dramatically lowering the cost and increasing the scope of information and analysis 
available to them, computerization enables workers performing abstract tasks to 
further specialize in their area of comparative advantage, with less time spent on 
acquiring and crunching information, and more time spent on interpreting and 
applying it. By the same token, information technology substitutes for many of the  
Figure 3 
Change in Occupational Employment Shares in Low, Middle, and High-Wage 
Occupations in 16 EU Countries, 1993–2010
Source: Goos, Manning, and Salomons (2014, table 2).
Notes: High-paying occupations are corporate managers; physical, mathematical, and engineering 
professionals; life science and health professionals; other professionals; managers of small enterprises; 
physical, mathematical, and engineering associate professionals; other associate professionals; life science 
and health associate professionals. Middle-paying occupations are stationary plant and related operators; 
metal, machinery, and related trade work; drivers and mobile plant operators; office clerks; precision, 
handicraft, craft printing, and related trade workers; extraction and building trades workers; customer 
service clerks; machine operators and assemblers; and other craft and related trade workers. Low-paying 
occupations are laborers in mining, construction, manufacturing, and transport; personal and protective 
service workers; models, salespersons, and demonstrators; and sales and service elementary occupations. 
−14.9% 
−12.1% −12.0% 
−10.9% −10.8% −10.7% −10.6% −10.6% −10.4% −10.3% 
−9.6% 
−8.6% −8.5% 
−7.6% 
−6.7% 
−4.9% 
−18% 
−15% 
−12% 
−9% 
−6% 
−3% 
0% 
3% 
6% 
9% 
12% 
15% 
IrelandBelgiumSpainUnited KingdomLuxembourgGreeceFinlandItaly AustriaDenmarkSwedenFranceNorwayNetherlandsGermanyPortugal
Low paying
Middle paying
High paying

--- PAGE 14 ---
16     Journal of Economic Perspectives
support occupations that these professions employ, including medical secretaries, para-
legals, and research assistants. Similarly, computerization and information technology 
appears to allow “delayering” of management structures (Caroli and Van Reenen 
2001). Arguably, many of the middle managers displaced by delayering performed 
routine information-processing tasks.
If demand for the output of abstract task-intensive activities is inelastic, these 
productivity gains might work to lower expenditure on these outputs, which could 
mitigate wage gains. However, all outward evidence suggests that as technology has 
boosted the output of the professions, demand for their services has more than kept 
pace. Health care is an obvious example, but one can readily make similar argu-
ments about finance, law, engineering, research, and design.
What about reactions from labor supply? If workers could quickly move into 
the highly educated professions, such a shift would mute earnings gains. But of 
course, many professions require both college and graduate degrees, so the produc-
tion pipeline for new entrants is at least five to ten years in length. Indeed, young 
US adults, particularly US males, have responded with remarkable sluggishness to 
the rising educational premium over the last 30 years (Autor 2014). For example, in 
1975, approximately 40 percent of hours worked by males with fewer than ten years 
of experience (a group that has made the more recent choices about college) were 
supplied by those with a college education. Forty years later in 2005, this share was 
almost unchanged. For women workers with less than ten years of experience, the 
share of total hours worked by those with a college education was 42 percent in 1982 
but had risen to 53 percent by 2005. In the last decade, the share of hours worked by 
those with less than ten years of experience and a college degree has increased for 
both men and women: in 2012, it was 52 percent of hours for men in this group and 
62 percent of the hours for women. Thus, while the stock of workers with college 
and graduate degrees has certainly grown, the supply response has not been nearly 
large enough to swamp the contemporaneous movements in labor demand.
Workers in abstract task-intensive occupations therefore benefit from informa-
tion technology via a virtuous combination of strong complementarities between 
routine and abstract tasks, elastic demand for services provided by abstract 
task-intensive occupations, and inelastic labor supply to these occupations over the 
short and medium term. In combination, these forces mean that information tech-
nology should raise earnings in occupations that make intensive use of abstract tasks 
and among workers who intensively supply them.
These same synergies do not apply to jobs that are intensive in manual tasks, 
such as janitors and cleaners, vehicle drivers, security guards, flight attendants, 
food service workers, and home health aides. Most manual task-intensive occupa-
tions are only minimally reliant on information or data processing for their core 
tasks, and involve only limited opportunities for either direct complementarity 
or substitution.
6
6 There are partial exceptions to this generalization: global positioning system satellites and scheduling 
software allows truckers and delivery services to minimize wasted mileage; calendar, contact, and billing 

--- PAGE 15 ---
David H. Autor     17
Aggregate evidence suggests that final demand for manual task-intensive 
work—services in particular—is relatively price inelastic (Baumol 1967; Autor and 
Dorn 2013). If so, productivity gains in manual task-intensive occupations that tend 
to reduce their price per unit of service provided will not necessarily raise expendi-
ture on their outputs. On the other hand, demand for manual task-intensive work 
appears to be relatively income elastic (Clark 1951; Mazzorali and Ragusa 2013), 
so that rising aggregate incomes will tend to increase demand for these activities. 
New technology and productivity growth in other areas may therefore indirectly raise 
demand for manual task-intensive occupations by increasing societal income.
Labor supply to manual task-intensive occupations is intrinsically elastic, due 
to their generally low education and training requirements. This insight does not 
preclude the possibility that wages in manual tasks will rise, at least to some extent. As 
Baumol (1967) observed, even absent productivity growth in technologically lagging 
occupations, wages in these occupations must rise over time with societal income to 
compensate workers for not entering other sectors (again, assuming that demand 
for these activities is relatively inelastic). But it does suggest that wage increases in 
these jobs will be restrained to some extent by the labor supply response, including 
from workers displaced in other sectors of the economy.
Overall, manual task-intensive activities are at best weakly complemented by 
computerization, do not benefit from elastic final demand, and face elastic labor 
supply that tempers demand-induced wage increases. Thus, while information tech-
nology has strongly contributed to employment polarization measured in quantity of 
jobs, we would not generally expect these employment changes to culminate in a 
corresponding wage polarization except perhaps at certain times or in certain labor 
markets. Indeed, in Autor and Dorn (2013), we present evidence that wages for 
manual-task occupations rose during the 1990s when labor markets were extremely 
tight, but after 2000, the expansion of manual task-intensive service occupations 
accelerated while wages in these occupations fell.
For insight about the evolution of wage patterns, consider Figure 4. The hori-
zontal axis of this figure is based on a ranking of all 318 detailed occupations from 
lowest to highest by their initial skill level, as measured by its 1979 mean hourly 
occupational wage. These categories are weighted by their initial size, and then 
grouped into 100 bins of equal size. The vertical axis of the figure then shows the 
percentage change in wages over each of four periods across the skill distribution—
with the line smoothed for clarity. (Again, more precisely, the figure plots 100 times 
log changes in employment, which is nearly equivalent to percentage points for 
small changes.)
The right-hand two-thirds of Figure 4 look like the plots of employment polariza-
tion. From 1979 through 2007, wages rose consistently across the high-skill portion 
software assists home health workers to manage data more effectively; and computerized ordering 
systems enable food service workers to rapidly tally customer tabs. In a few years time, many retailers 
may employ RFID “chip” technology that will scan purchases without needing a human checkout cashier 
at all.

--- PAGE 16 ---
18     Journal of Economic Perspectives
of the figure, which is disproportionately made up of the abstract task-intensive 
categories of professional, technical, and managerial occupations. By contrast, wage 
growth in the middle-skill, typically routine task-intensive occupations was less rapid 
and generally decelerated over time. For the low-education, manual task-intensive 
occupations heavily represented on the left-hand side of Figure 4, in the 1980s, 
wage growth was a little more rapid than in the middle-skill occupations—and in 
the 1990s, it was much more rapid. However, that changed in the 2000s: while 
Figure 2 showed that employment growth in these occupations exceeded that in 
all other categories between 1999 and 2007, Figure 4 shows wage growth was gener-
ally negative in the low-skill percentiles, lower than in all other categories (Mishel, 
Shierholz, and Schmitt 2013). During this time period, my strong hunch is that 
the explanation is that declining employment in middle-skill routine task-intensive 
Figure 4 
Changes in Mean Wages by Occupational Skill Percentile among Full-Time, 
Full-Year (FTFY) Workers, 1979–2012 
(the y-axis plots 100 times log changes in employment, which is nearly equivalent to 
percentage points for small changes)
Sources: Author, calculated using 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census IPUMS files; American Community Survey 
combined file 2006–2008, American Community Survey 2012.
Notes: The figure plots changes in mean log wages over each period, by 1979 occupational skill percentile 
rank using a locally weighted smoothing regression (bandwidth 0.8 with 100 observations), where skill 
percentiles are measured as the employment-weighted percentile rank of an occupation’s mean log 
wage in the Census IPUMS 1980 5 percent extract. The sample includes the working-age (1–64) civilian 
non-institutionalized population with 48+ annual weeks worked and 35+ usual weekly hours. Weekly 
wages are calculated as annual earnings divided by weeks worked.
−5
0
5
10
15
20
100 × Log Change in Mean FTFY Wage
0 20 40 60 80 100
Skill percentile (ranked by occupation’s 1979 mean log wage)
1979–1989 1989–1999 1999–2007 2007–2012

--- PAGE 17 ---
Why Are There Still So Many Jobs?     19
jobs led middle-skill workers—including new entrants, those displaced from routine 
task-intensive jobs, and those who lost jobs during recession—to enter manual 
task-intensive occupations instead (Smith 2013; Cortes, Jaimovich, Nekarda, and 
Siu 2014; Foote and Ryan 2014).
A final set of facts illustrated by Figure 4 is that overall wage growth was anemic 
throughout the 2000s, even prior to the Great Recession. Between 1999 and 2007, 
real wage changes were negative below approximately the 15th percentile, and were 
below 5 percentage points up to the 70th percentile of the distribution. Indeed, 
wage growth was greater at all percentiles during both the 1980s and 1990s than in 
the pre-recession 2000s.
7 Of course, wage growth was essentially zero at all percentiles 
from 2007 to 2012.
Why are the rapidly rising earnings of the top 1 percent (as discussed in 
Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez 2011, for example) not strongly evident in Figure 4? 
One reason reflects substance; another is an artifact of the data. Substantively, the 
plot depicts changes in earnings by occupational percentile rather than wage percen-
tile. Wage growth by occupational percentile is less concentrated than wage growth 
across wage percentiles because the highest earners are found across a variety of 
occupations. In addition, the very highest percentiles of earnings are censored in 
public use Census and American Community Survey data files, which further masks 
earnings gains at extreme quantiles.
The Recent Slowdown in the Growth of High-Skill Occupations
The hypothesis that automation and information technology has led to occu-
pational and, to a lesser degree, wage polarization in the US labor force can explain 
some key features of the US and the cross-national data. But reality invariably proves 
more complicated than any single theory anticipates.
For my thesis linking technological change to occupational change, one 
concern is the unexplained deceleration of employment growth in abstract 
task-intensive occupations after 2000 (Beaudry, Green, and Sand 2014, forth-
coming; Mishel, Shierholz, and Schmitt 2013). Figure 5 follows the format of 
Figure 4 but instead of showing (approximate) percentage changes in wages on 
the vertical axis, it shows percentage changes in the employment share of the jobs 
ranked by their skill level in 1979. Since the sum of shares must equal one at any 
time period, the changes in these shares across the decades must total zero, and 
thus, the height at each skill percentile measures the growth in each occupation’s 
employment relative to the whole.
7 Because the 2000–2007 interval is two years shorter than the 1979–1989 period, one should multiply 
the later changes by 1.25 to put them on the same temporal footing. But even after making such an 
adjustment, wage growth was still considerably weaker at all percentiles from 2000–2007 than in the 
earlier two decades.

--- PAGE 18 ---
20     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Figure 5 contributes three nuances to the occupational polarization story 
above. First, the pace of employment gains in low-wage, manual task-intensive jobs 
has risen successively across periods, as shown at the left-hand side of the figure. 
Second, the occupations that are losing employment share appear to be increas-
ingly drawn from higher ranks of the occupational distribution. For example, the 
highest ranked occupation to lose employment share during the 1980s lay at approx-
imately the 45th percentile of the skill distribution. In the final two subperiods, this 
rank rose still further to above the 75th percentile—suggesting that the locus of 
displaced middle-skill employment is moving into higher-skilled territories. Third, 
growth of high-skill, high-wage occupations (those associated with abstract work) 
decelerated markedly in the 2000s, with no relative growth in the top two deciles 
of the occupational skill distribution during 1999 through 2007, and only a modest 
recovery between 2007 and 2012. Stated plainly, the growth of occupational employ-
ment across skill levels looks U-shaped earlier in the period, with gains at low-skill 
and high-skill levels. By the 2000s, the pattern of occupational employment across 
Figure 5 
Smoothed Employment Changes by Occupational Skill Percentile, 1979–2012
Sources: Author, calculated using 1980, 1990, and 2000 Census Integrated Public Use Microdata Series 
(IPUMS) files; American Community Survey combined file 2006–2008, American Community Survey 2012.
Notes: The figure plots changes in employment shares by 1980 occupational skill percentile rank using a 
locally weighted smoothing regression (bandwidth 0.8 with 100 observations), where skill percentiles are 
measured as the employment-weighted percentile rank of an occupation’s mean log wage in the Census 
IPUMS 1980 5 percent extract. Employment in each occupation is calculated using workers’ hours of 
annual labor supply times the Census sampling weights. Consistent occupation codes for Census years 
1980, 1990, and 2000, and 2008 are from Autor and Dorn (2013).
−.1
0
.1
.2
100 × Change in Employment Share
0 20 40 60 80 100
Skill percentile (ranked by occupation’s 1979 mean log wage)
1979–1989 1989–1999 1999–2007 2007–2012

--- PAGE 19 ---
David H. Autor     21
skill levels began to resemble a downward ramp. In Autor (2015), I present a more 
detailed breakdown of these patterns, and in particular suggest that the set of 
abstract task-intensive jobs is not growing as rapidly as the potential supply of highly 
educated workers.
What explains the slowing growth of abstract task-intensive employment? 
One interpretation is that automation, information technology, and technological 
progress in general are encroaching upward in the task domain and beginning to 
substitute strongly for the work done by professional, technical, and managerial 
occupations. While one should not dismiss this possibility out of hand, it doesn’t 
fit well with the pattern of computer and software investment. If information tech-
nology is increasingly replacing workers high in the skill distribution, one would 
expect a surge of corporate investment in computer hardware and software. Instead, 
Figure 6 shows that in early 2014, information processing equipment and software 
investment was only 3.5 percent of GDP, a level last seen in 1995 at the outset of 
the “dot-com” era. To me, the evidence in Figure 6 suggests a temporary disloca-
tion of demand for information technology capital during the latter half of the 
1990s, followed by a sharp correction after 2000. I suspect that the huge falloff in 
Figure 6 
Private Fixed Investment in Information Processing Equipment and Software as a 
Percentage of Gross Domestic Product, 1949–2014
Source: FRED, Federal Bank of St. Louis. http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/graph/?g=GXc (accessed 
8/3/2014).
0.0% 
1.0% 
1.5% 
2.0% 
2.5% 
3.0% 
3.5% 
4.0% 
4.5% 
5.0% 
1949 1954 1959 1964 1969 1974 1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009 2014 
0.5% 

--- PAGE 20 ---
22     Journal of Economic Perspectives
information investment may have dampened innovative activity and demand for 
high-skilled workers more broadly.
As noted earlier, technological change is far from the only factor affecting US 
labor markets in the last 15 years. For example, the deceleration of wage growth 
and changes in occupational patterns in the US labor market after 2000, and 
further after 2007, is surely associated to some extent with two types of macro-
economic events. First, there are the business cycle effects—the bursting of the 
“dot-com” bubble in 2000, and the collapse of the housing market and the ensuing 
financial crisis in 2007–2008—both of which curtailed investment and innovative 
activity. Second, there are the employment dislocations in the US labor market 
brought about by rapid globalization, particularly the sharp rise of import pene-
tration from China following its accession to the World Trade Organization in 
2001 (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013; Pierce and Schott 2012; Acemoglu, Autor, 
Dorn, Hanson, and Price forthcoming). China’s rapid rise to a premier manufac-
turing exporter had far-reaching impacts on US workers, reducing employment 
in directly import-competing US manufacturing industries and depressing labor 
demand in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors that served as 
upstream suppliers to these industries.
Of course, these forces are in various ways linked with the spread of automa-
tion and technology. Advances in information and communications technologies 
have changed job demands in US workplaces directly and also indirectly, by making 
it increasingly feasible and cost-effective for firms to source, monitor, and coordi-
nate complex production processes at disparate locations worldwide and altering 
competitive conditions for US manufacturers and workers. This multidimensional 
complementarity among causal factors makes it both conceptually and empirically 
difficult to isolate the “pure” effect of any one factor.
Polanyi’s Paradox: Will It Be Overcome?
Automation, complemented in recent decades by the exponentially increasing 
power of information technology, has driven changes in productivity that have 
disrupted labor markets. This essay has emphasized that jobs are made up of many 
tasks and that while automation and computerization can substitute for some of 
them, understanding the interaction between technology and employment requires 
thinking about more than just substitution. It requires thinking about the range 
of tasks involved in jobs, and how human labor can often complement new tech-
nology. It also requires thinking about price and income elasticities for different 
kinds of output, and about labor supply responses.
The tasks that have proved most vexing to automate are those demanding flexi-
bility, judgment, and common sense—skills that we understand only tacitly. I referred 
to this constraint above as Polanyi’s paradox. In the past decade, computerization 
and robotics have progressed into spheres of human activity that were considered 
off limits only a few years earlier—driving vehicles, parsing legal documents, even 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Why Are There Still So Many Jobs?     23
performing agricultural field labor. Is Polanyi’s paradox soon to be at least mostly 
overcome, in the sense that the vast majority of tasks will soon be automated?8
My reading of the evidence suggests otherwise. Indeed, Polanyi’s paradox helps 
to explain what has not yet been accomplished, and further illuminates the paths by 
which more will ultimately be accomplished. Specifically, I see two distinct paths that 
engineering and computer science can seek to traverse to automate tasks for which we 
“do not know the rules”: environmental control and machine learning. The first path 
circumvents Polanyi’s paradox by regularizing the environment, so that comparatively 
inflexible machines can function semi-autonomously. The second approach inverts 
Polanyi’s paradox: rather than teach machines rules that we do not understand, engi-
neers develop machines that attempt to infer tacit rules from context, abundant data, 
and applied statistics.
Environmental Control
Most automated systems lack flexibility—they are brittle. Modern automobile 
plants, for example, employ industrial robots to install windshields on new vehicles 
as they move through the assembly line. But aftermarket windshield replacement 
companies employ technicians, not robots, to install replacement windshields. 
Evidently, the tasks of removing a broken windshield, preparing the windshield frame 
to accept a replacement, and fitting a replacement into that frame demand more 
real-time adaptability than any contemporary robot can cost-effectively approach.
The distinction between assembly line production and the in-situ repair 
highlights the role of environmental control in enabling automation. Engineers 
can in some cases radically simplify the environment in which machines work to 
enable autonomous operation, as in the familiar example of a factory assembly 
line. Numerous examples of this approach to environmental regularization are 
so ingrained in daily technology that they escape notice, however. To enable the 
operation of present-day automobiles, for example, humanity has adapted the natu-
rally occurring environment by leveling, re-grading, and covering with asphalt a 
nontrivial percentage of the earth’s land surface.
9
The ongoing automation of warehouses provides another example. Large 
online retailers, such as Amazon.com, Zappos.com, and Staples, operate systems of 
warehouses that have traditionally employed legions of dexterous, athletic “pickers,” 
who run and climb through shelves of typically non-air-conditioned warehouses to 
locate, collect, box, label, and ship goods. There is at present no cost-effective robotic 
8 For a glimpse of the view that just about anything can now be computerized, see the widely cited 
(albeit unpublished) article by the economists Carl Frey and Michael Osborne, who write (2013, p. 24) 
that, “recent developments in ML [machine learning] and MR [mobile robotics], building upon big 
data, allow for pattern recognition, and thus enable computer capital to rapidly substitute for labour 
across a wide range of non-routine tasks. Yet some inhibiting engineering bottlenecks to computerization 
persist. Beyond these bottlenecks, however, we argue that it is largely already technologically possible to 
automate almost any task, provided that sufficient amounts of data are gathered for pattern recognition.”
9 According to Wikipedia, so-called impervious surfaces (mostly roads and parking lots) cover 43,000 
square miles of land in the lower 48 United States—roughly equal to the land area of the state of Ohio 
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impervious_surface, accessed 8/4/2014).

--- PAGE 22 ---
24     Journal of Economic Perspectives
facsimile for these human pickers. The job’s steep requirements for flexibility, object 
recognition, physical dexterity, and fine motor coordination are too formidable.
But large components of warehousing can be automated, as demonstrated 
by Kiva Systems, a robotic warehousing startup that was purchased by Amazon in 
2012. The core of the Kiva system is a dispatch program that oversees the flow of all 
goods through the warehouse, coordinating the work of robots, which carry shelves, 
with the work of humans. As objects arrive at the facility for stocking, the dispatch 
software directs robots to transport and line up empty shelves to a loading area, 
where human stockers place merchandise on shelves. Robots then carry the loaded 
shelves back to a storage warehouse, where the dispatch software directs their place-
ment to optimize product availability for expected product demand. As new orders 
arrive, the dispatch software sends robots to retrieve shelves and lines them up in 
a packing area. Then a human picker, directed by a laser pointer controlled by the 
dispatch software, takes objects from the assembled shelves, packs them in shipping 
boxes, applies a shipping label, and drops the package in a chute for delivery. As 
items are picked, the robots take the shelves away until needed again for packing 
or restocking. Thus, in a Kiva-operated warehouse, robots handle only the routine 
task of moving shelves across a level surface; workers handle merchandise; and the 
dispatch software coordinates the activity.
While Kiva Systems provides a particularly clear example of exploiting envi-
ronmental control to extend the reach of automation, the same principle is often 
lurking behind more sophisticated packaging. Perhaps the least recognized—and 
most mythologized—is the self-driving Google Car. Computer scientists sometimes 
remark that the Google car does not drive on roads, but rather on maps. A Google 
car navigates through the road network primarily by comparing its real-time 
audio-visual sensor data against painstakingly hand-curated maps that specify the 
exact locations of all roads, signals, signage, and obstacles. The Google car adapts 
in real time to obstacles, such as cars, pedestrians, and road hazards, by braking, 
turning, and stopping. But if the car’s software determines that the environment in 
which it is operating differs from the environment that has been preprocessed by its 
human engineers—when it encounters an unexpected detour or a crossing guard 
instead of a traffic signal—the car requires its human operator to take control. Thus, 
while the Google car appears outwardly to be adaptive and flexible, it is somewhat 
akin to a train running on invisible tracks.
These examples highlight both the limitations of current technology to 
accomplish nonroutine tasks, and the capacity of human ingenuity to surmount 
some of these obstacles by re-engineering the environment in which work tasks 
are performed.
Machine Learning
Polanyi’s paradox—“we know more than we can tell”—presents a challenge for 
computerization because, if people understand how to perform a task only tacitly 
and cannot “tell” a computer how to perform the task, then seemingly programmers 
cannot automate the task—or so the thinking has gone. But this understanding 

--- PAGE 23 ---
David H. Autor     25
is shifting rapidly due to advances in machine learning. Machine learning applies 
statistics and inductive reasoning to supply best-guess answers where formal proce-
dural rules are unknown. Where engineers are unable to program a machine to 
“simulate” a nonroutine task by following a scripted procedure, they may neverthe-
less be able to program a machine to master the task autonomously by studying 
successful examples of the task being carried out by others. Through a process of 
exposure, training, and reinforcement, machine learning algorithms may poten-
tially infer how to accomplish tasks that have proved dauntingly challenging to 
codify with explicit procedures.
As a concrete example, consider the task of visually identifying a chair (discussed 
in Autor, forthcoming). An engineer applying a conventional rules-based program-
ming paradigm might attempt to specify what features of an object qualify an object 
as a chair—it possesses legs, arms, a seat, and a back, for example. But one would 
soon discover that many chairs do not possess all of these features (for example, 
some chairs have no back, or no arms). If the engineer then relaxed the required 
feature set accordingly (chair back optional), the included set would grow to encom-
pass many objects that are not chairs, such as small tables. The canonical approach 
to recognizing objects by pre-specifying requisite features—and more sophisticated 
variants of this approach—would likely have very high misclassification rates. Yet, 
any grade-school child could perform this task with high accuracy. What does the 
child know that the rules-based procedure does not? Unfortunately, we cannot 
enunciate precisely what the child knows—and this is precisely Polanyi’s paradox.
Machine learning potentially circumvents this problem. Relying on large data-
bases of so-called “ground truth”—a vast set of curated examples of labeled objects—a 
machine learning algorithm attempts to infer what attributes of an object make it 
more or less likely to be designated a chair. This process is called “training.” When 
training is complete, the machine can apply this statistical model to attempt to iden-
tify chairs that are distinct from those in the original dataset. If the statistical model is 
sufficiently good, it may be able to recognize chairs that are somewhat distinct from 
those in the original training data, like chairs of different shapes, materials, or dimen-
sions. Machine learning does not require an explicit physical model of “chairness.” At 
its core, machine learning is an atheoretical brute force technique—what psycholo-
gists call “dustbowl empiricism”—requiring only large training databases, substantial 
processing power, and, of course, sophisticated software.
10
How well does machine learning work in practice? If you use a search engine 
or Google Translate, operate a smartphone with voice commands, or follow movie 
suggestions from Netflix, you can assess for yourself how successfully these tech-
nologies function. For example, if the majority of users who recently searched for  
the terms “degrees bacon” clicked on links for Kevin Bacon rather than links  
for best bacon cooking temperatures, the search engine would tend to place the  
Kevin Bacon links higher in the list of results. My general observation is that  
10 Varian (2014) provides an introduction to machine learning techniques for economists.

--- PAGE 24 ---
26     Journal of Economic Perspectives
the tools are inconsistent: uncannily accurate at times; typically only so-so; and 
occasionally unfathomable. Moreover, an irony of machine learning algorithms is 
that they also cannot “tell” programmers why they do what they do. IBM’s Watson 
computer famously triumphed in the trivia game of Jeopardy against champion human 
opponents. Yet Watson also produced a spectacularly incorrect answer during its 
winning match. Under the category of US Cities, the question was, “Its largest airport 
was named for a World War II hero; its second largest, for a World War II battle.” 
Watson’s proposed answer was Toronto, a city in Canada. Even leading-edge accom-
plishments in this domain can appear somewhat underwhelming. A 2012 New York 
Times article (Markoff 2012) described Google’s X Lab’s recent project (Le et al. 
2012) to apply a neural network of 16,000 processors to identify images of cats on 
YouTube. The article’s headline ruefully poses the question, “How Many Computers 
to Identify a Cat? 16,000.”
Since the underlying technologies—the software, hardware, and training data—
are all improving rapidly (Andreopouos and Tsotsos 2013), one should view these 
examples as prototypes rather than as mature products. Some researchers expect 
that as computing power rises and training databases grow, the brute force machine 
learning approach will approach or exceed human capabilities. Others suspect that 
machine learning will only ever “get it right” on average, while missing many of 
the most important and informative exceptions. Ultimately, what makes an object a 
chair is that it is purpose-built for a human being to sit upon. Machine-learning algo-
rithms may have fundamental problems with reasoning about “purposiveness” and 
intended uses, even given an arbitrarily large training database of images (Grabner, 
Gall, and Van Gool 2011). One is reminded of Carl Sagan’s (1980, p. 218) remark, 
“If you wish to make an apple pie from scratch, you must first invent the universe.”
Conclusions
Major newspaper stories offer fresh examples daily of technologies that substi-
tute for human labor in an expanding—although still circumscribed—set of tasks. 
The offsetting effects of complementarities and rising demand in other areas are, 
however, far harder to identify as they occur. My own prediction is that employ-
ment polarization will not continue indefinitely (as argued in Autor 2013). While 
some of the tasks  in many current middle-skill jobs are susceptible to automation, 
many middle-skill jobs will continue to demand a mixture of tasks from across the 
skill spectrum. For example, medical support occupations—radiology techni-
cians, phlebotomists, nurse technicians, and others—are a significant and rapidly 
growing category of relatively well-remunerated, middle-skill employment. Most of 
these occupations require mastery of “middle-skill” mathematics, life sciences, and 
analytical reasoning. They typically require at least two years of postsecondary voca-
tional training, and in some cases a four-year college degree or more. This broad 
description also fits numerous skilled trade and repair occupations, including 
plumbers, builders, electricians, heating/ventilating/air-conditioning installers, and 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Why Are There Still So Many Jobs?     27
automotive technicians. It also fits a number of modern clerical occupations that 
provide coordination and decision-making functions, rather than simply typing and 
filing, like a number of jobs in marketing. There are also cases where technology is 
enabling workers with less esoteric technical mastery to perform additional tasks: for 
example, the nurse practitioner occupation that increasingly performs diagnosing 
and prescribing tasks in lieu of physicians.
I expect that a significant stratum of middle-skill jobs combining specific voca-
tional skills with foundational middle-skills levels of literacy, numeracy, adaptability, 
problem solving, and common sense will persist in coming decades. My conjec-
ture is that many of the tasks currently bundled into these jobs cannot readily 
be unbundled—with machines performing the middle-skill tasks and workers 
performing only a low-skill residual—without a substantial drop in quality. This 
argument suggests that many of the middle-skill jobs that persist in the future will 
combine routine technical tasks with the set of nonroutine tasks in which workers 
hold comparative advantage: interpersonal interaction, flexibility, adaptability, 
and problem solving. In general, these same demands for interaction frequently 
privilege face-to-face interactions over remote performance, meaning that these 
same middle-skill occupations may have relatively low susceptibility to offshoring. 
Lawrence Katz memorably titles workers who virtuously combine technical and 
interpersonal tasks as “the new artisans” (see Friedman 2010), and Holzer (2015) 
documents that “new middle skill jobs” are in fact growing rapidly, even as tradi-
tional production and clerical occupations contract.
11
This prediction has one obvious catch: the ability of the US education and 
job training system (both public and private) to produce the kinds of workers 
who will thrive in these middle-skill jobs of the future can be called into question. 
In this and other ways, the issue is not that middle-class workers are doomed by 
automation and technology, but instead that human capital investment must be 
at the heart of any long-term strategy for producing skills that are complemented 
by rather than substituted for by technological change. In 1900, the typical young, 
native-born American had only a common school education, about the equivalent 
of sixth to eighth grades. By the late 19th century, many Americans recognized that 
this level of schooling was inadequate: farm employment was declining, industry was 
rising, and their children would need additional skills to earn a living. The United 
States responded to this challenge over the first four decades of the 20th century by 
becoming the first nation in the world to deliver universal high school education to 
its citizens (Goldin and Katz 2008). Tellingly, the high school movement was led by 
the farm states. Societal adjustments to earlier waves of technological advancement 
were neither rapid, automatic, nor cheap. But they did pay off handsomely.
11 A creative paper by Lin (2011) studies the growth of “new work” by documenting the differential 
growth of US employment in newly introduced Census occupation codes during the 1980s and 1990s 
in high-education and high-technology cities. New occupational titles are generally clustered across two 
categories: those associated with using new technologies such as web developer or database adminis-
trator; and novel personal services, such as personal chefs and stylists.

--- PAGE 26 ---
28     Journal of Economic Perspectives
A final point, typically neglected in recent dismal prophesies of machine-human 
substitution, is that if human labor is indeed rendered superfluous by automation, 
then our chief economic problem will be one of distribution, not of scarcity. The 
primary system of income distribution in market economies is rooted in labor scar-
city; citizens possess (or acquire) a bundle of valuable “human capital” that, due to 
its scarcity, generates a flow of income over the career path. If machines were in fact 
to make human labor superfluous, we would have vast aggregate wealth but a serious 
challenge in determining who owns it and how to share it. One might presume that 
with so much wealth at hand, distribution would be relatively straightforward to 
resolve. But history suggests that this prediction never holds true. There is always 
perceived scarcity and ongoing conflict over distribution, and I do not expect that 
this problem will become any less severe as automation advances. Are we actually 
on the verge of throwing off the yoke of scarcity so that our primary economic 
challenge soon becomes one of distribution? Here, I recall the observations of econ-
omist, computer scientist, and Nobel laureate Herbert Simon (1966), who wrote 
at the time of the automation anxiety of the 1960s: “Insofar as they are economic 
problems at all, the world’s problems in this generation and the next are problems 
of scarcity, not of intolerable abundance. The bogeyman of automation consumes 
worrying capacity that should be saved for real problems . . .” A half century on, 
I believe the evidence favors Simon’s view.
■ This paper draws from an essay prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 
economic policy symposium on “Re-Evaluating Labor Market Dynamics,” August 21–23, 
2014, in Jackson Hole, Wyoming (Autor 2015) as well as the essay “The Paradox of 
Abundance: Automation Anxiety Returns” (Autor forthcoming). I thank Erik Brynjolfsson, 
Chris Foote, Frank Levy, Lisa Lynch, Andrew McAfee, Brendan Price, Seth Teller, Dave 
Wessel, participants in the MIT CSAIL/Economists Lunch Seminar, and the editors of this 
journal for insights that helped to shape my thinking on this subject. I thank Sookyo Jeong and 
Brendan Price for superb research assistance.
References
Acemoglu, Daron, David H. Autor, David Dorn, 
Gordon Hanson, and Brendan Price. Forthcoming. 
“Import Competition and the Great U.S. Employ-
ment Sag of the 2000s.” Journal of Labor Economics. 
Akst, Daniel. 2013. “What Can We Learn from 
Past Anxiety over Automation?” The Wilson Quar-
terly, Summer.
Alpert, Andrew, and Jill Auyer. 2003. “Evaluating 
the BLS 1988–2000 Employment Projections.” 
Monthly Labor Review, October, pp. 13–37.
Andreopoulos, Alexander, and John K. Tsotsos. 
2013. “50 Years of Object Recognition: Directions 
Forward.” Computer Vision and Image Understanding 
117(8): 827–91.

--- PAGE 27 ---
David H. Autor     29
Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty, and 
Emmanuel Saez. 2011. “Top Incomes in the Long 
Run of History.” Journal of Economic Literature  
49(1): 3–71.
Autor, David H. 2013. “The ‘Task Approach’ to 
Labor Markets: An Overview.” Journal for Labour 
Market Research 46(3): 185–99.
Autor, David H. 2014. “Skills, Education, and 
the Rise of Earnings Inequality among the ‘Other 
99 Percent.’” Science 344(6186): 843–51.
Autor, David H. 2015. “Polanyi’s Paradox and 
the Shape of Employment Growth.” In Re-Evalu-
ating Labor Market Dynamics , pp. 129–79. Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Autor, David H. Forthcoming. “The Paradox 
of Abundance: Automation Anxiety Returns.” In 
Performance and Progress: Essays on Capitalism, Busi-
ness and Society , edited by Subramanian Rangan. 
London: Oxford University Press.
Autor, David H., and David Dorn. 2013. “The 
Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polariza-
tion of the US Labor Market.” American Economic 
Review 103(5): 1553–97.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. 
Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor 
Market Effects of Import Competition in the 
United States.” American Economic Review 103(6): 
2121–68.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. 
Hanson. 2015. “Untangling Trade and Technology: 
Evidence from Local Labor Markets.” Economic 
Journal 125(584): 621–46.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa 
S. Kearney. 2006. “The Polarization of the U.S. 
Labor Market.” American Economic Review 96(2): 
189–94.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa 
S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: 
Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 90(2): 300–323.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. 
Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent 
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1279–1333.
Baumol, William J. 1967. “Macroeconomics 
of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban 
Crisis.” American Economic Review 57(3): 415–26.
Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin 
M. Sand. 2014. “The Declining Fortunes of the 
Young since 2000.” American Economic Review 
104(5): 381–86.
Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin 
M. Sand. Forthcoming. “The Great Reversal in the 
Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks.” Journal of 
Labor Economics.
Bessen, James. 2015. “Toil and Technology.” 
Finance and Development 52(1).
Bowen, Harold R. (Chairman). 1966. “Report 
of the National Commission on Technology, 
Automation, and Economic Progress: Volume I.” 
Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. 2014. 
The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Pros -
perity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies . New York 
and London: W.W. Norton & Company.
Caroli, Eve, and John Van Reenen. 2001. “Skill-
Biased Organizational Change? Evidence from 
a Panel of British and French Establishments.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1449–92.
Clark, Colin. 1951. The Conditions of Economic 
Progress, 2nd edition. London: Macmillan.
Cortes, Guido Matias, Nir Jaimovich, 
Christopher J. Nekarda, and Henry E. Siu.  
2014. “The Micro and Macro of Disappearing 
Routine Jobs: A Flows Approach.” NBER Working 
Paper 20307, July.
Douglas, Paul H. 1930. Real Wages in the United 
States, 1890–1926. New York: Houghton Mifflin 
Company.
Foote, Christopher L., and Richard W. Ryan.  
2014. “Labor-Market Polarization over the Busi-
ness Cycle.” Public Policy Discussion Paper 12-8, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, April.
Frey, Carl Benedikt, and Michael A. Osborne. 
2013. “The Future of Employment: How Suscep-
tible are Jobs to Computerization?” Oxford Martin 
School, September.
Friedman, Thomas L. 2010. “The Election That 
Wasn’t.” New York Times, October 23.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz.  
2008. The Race between Education and Technology. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning. 2003. “Lousy 
and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work 
in Britain.” Center for Economic Performance 
Discussion Papers DP0604, December.
Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning. 2007. 
“Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of 
Work in Britain.” Review of Economics and Statistics 
89(1): 118–33.
Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna 
Salomons. 2014. “Explaining Job Polarization: 
Routine-Biased Technological Change and Offshor-
ing.” American Economic Review 104(8): 2509–26.
Grabner, Helmut, Juergen Gall, and Luc Van 
Gool. 2011. “What Makes a Chair a Chair?” In 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2011, IEEE 
Conference, June 20–25, pp. 1529–36.
Graetz, Georg, and Guy Michaels. 2015. “Robots 
at Work.” IZA Discussion Papers 8938, Institute for 
the Study of Labor (IZA).
Herald Press, The. 1966. “Skirting the Automa-
tion Question.” February 7, p. 2. (The Herald Press 
of St. Joseph, Michigan.)

--- PAGE 28 ---
30     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Hoffman, William, and Leo Furcht. 2014. The 
Biologist’s Imagination: Innovation in the Biosciences. 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Holzer, Harry J. 2015. “Job Market Polarization 
and U.S. Worker Skills: A Tale of Two Middles.” 
Brookings Institution Economic Studies Working 
Paper, April 6.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Enrico Moretti. 2003. 
“Can Free Entry Be Inefficient? Fixed Commis-
sions and Social Waste in the Real Estate Industry.” 
Journal of Political Economy 111(5): 1076–1122.
Jackson, Kristin. 1993. “The World’s First Motel 
Rests upon Its Memories.” Seattle Times, April 25.
Jevons, William Stanley. 1865. The Coal Question; 
An Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation, and 
the Probable Exhaustion of Our Coal Mines. London: 
Macmillan and Co.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Robert A. Margo. 2014. 
“Technical Change and the Relative Demand for 
Skilled Labor: The United States in Historical 
Perspective.” In Human Capital in History, edited by 
Leah Platt Bouston, Carola Frydman, and Robert 
A. Margo, 15–57. University of Chicago Press.
Kremer, Michael. 1993. “The O-Ring Theory 
of Economic Development.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 108(3): 551–75.
Le, Quoc V., Marc’ Aurelio Ranzato, Rajat 
Monga, Matthieu Devin, Kai Chen, Greg S. 
Corrado, Jeff Dean, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2012. 
“Building High-Level Features Using Large Scale 
Unsupervised Learning.” In Proceedings of  the 
29th International Conference on Machine Learning, 
June 26–July 1, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
Levy, Frank and Richard J. Murnane. 2004. The 
New Division of Labor: How Computers Are Creating 
the Next Job Market. Princeton University Press.
Lin, Jeffrey. 2011. “Technological Adaptation, 
Cities, and New Work.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 93(2): 554–74.
Markoff, John. 2012. “How Many Computers 
to Identify a Cat? 16,000.” New York Times, June 25.
Mazzolari, Francesca, and Giuseppe Ragusa.  
2013. “Spillovers from High-Skill Consumption to 
Low-Skill Labor Markets.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 95(1): 74–86.
Michaels, Guy, Ashwini Natraj, and John Van 
Reenen. 2014. “Has ICT Polarized Skill Demand? 
Evidence from Eleven Countries over Twenty-Five 
Years.” Review of Economics and Statistics 96(1): 60–77.
Mishel, Lawrence, Heidi Shierholz, and John 
Schmitt. 2013. “Don’t Blame the Robots: Assessing 
the Job Polarization Explanation of Growing 
Wage Inequality.” EPI-CEPR Working Paper, 
November 19.
Moravec, Hans. 1988. Mind Children: The Future 
of Robot and Human Intelligence. Harvard University 
Press.
Nordhaus, William D. 2007. “Two Centuries 
of Productivity Growth in Computing.” Journal of 
Economic History 67(1): 17–22.
Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott. 2012. 
“The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufac-
turing Employment.” NBER Working Paper 18655.
Polanyi, Michael. 1966. The Tacit Dimension . 
New York: Doubleday.
Ruggles, Steven, Trent J. Alexander, Katie 
Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, 
and Matthew Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use 
Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable 
database]. University of Minnesota.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., Seth G. Benzell, Guillermo 
LaGarda. 2015. “Robots: Curse or Blessing? A Basic 
Framework.” NBER Working Paper 21091, April.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Laurence J. Kotlikoff.  
2012. “Smart Machines and Long-Term Misery.” 
NBER Working Paper 18629, December.
Sagan, Carl. 1980. Cosmos. New York: Random 
House.
Simon, Herbert. A. 1966. “Automation” (a letter 
in response to “Where Do We Go From Here?” 
March 17, 1966 issue) New York Review of Books , 
May 26.
Smith, Christopher L. 2013. “The Dynamics 
of Labor Market Polarization.” Federal Reserve 
Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
No. 2013-57, August.
TIME. 1961. “The Automation Jobless.” 
February 24.
US Bureau of the Census. 1949. Historical Statis-
tics of the United States, 1789–1945. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Series D 134-144.
Varian, Hal R. 2014. “Big Data: New Tricks for 
Econometrics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives  
28(2): 3–28.

--- PAGE 29 ---
This article has been cited by:
1. Barbara Ribeiro, Robert Meckin, Andrew Balmer, Philip Shapira. 2023. The digitalisation paradox
of everyday scientific labour: How mundane knowledge work is amplified and diversified in the
biosciences. Research Policy 52:1, 104607. [Crossref]
2. Stefanie Findeisen, Steffen Wild. 2022. General digital competences of beginning trainees in
commercial vocational education and training. Empirical Research in Vocational Education and
Training 14:1. . [Crossref]
3. Aniruddh Mohan, Parth Vaishnav. 2022. Impact of automation on long haul trucking operator-hours
in the United States. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 9:1. . [Crossref]
4. Solène Guenat, Phil Purnell, Zoe G. Davies, Maximilian Nawrath, Lindsay C. Stringer, Giridhara
Rathnaiah Babu, Muniyandi Balasubramanian, Erica E. F. Ballantyne, Bhuvana Kolar Bylappa, Bei
Chen, Peta De Jager, Andrea Del Prete, Alessandro Di Nuovo, Cyril O. Ehi-Eromosele, Mehran
Eskandari Torbaghan, Karl L. Evans, Markus Fraundorfer, Wissem Haouas, Josephat U. Izunobi,
Juan Carlos Jauregui-Correa, Bilal Y. Kaddouh, Sonia Lewycka, Ana C. MacIntosh, Christine Mady,
Carsten Maple, Worku N. Mhiret, Rozhen Kamal Mohammed-Amin, Olukunle Charles Olawole,
Temilola Oluseyi, Caroline Orfila, Alessandro Ossola, Marion Pfeifer, Tony Pridmore, Moti L. Rijal,
Christine C. Rega-Brodsky, Ian D. Robertson, Christopher D. F. Rogers, Charles Rougé, Maryam
B. Rumaney, Mmabaledi K. Seeletso, Mohammed Z. Shaqura, L. M. Suresh, Martin N. Sweeting,
Nick Taylor Buck, M. U. Ukwuru, Thomas Verbeek, Hinrich Voss, Zia Wadud, Xinjun Wang, Neil
Winn, Martin Dallimer. 2022. Meeting sustainable development goals via robotics and autonomous
systems. Nature Communications 13:1. . [Crossref]
5. Thomas Gries, Wim Naudé. 2022. Modelling artificial intelligence in economics. Journal for Labour
Market Research 56:1. . [Crossref]
6. Ying Liu, Steve Liu, Ziqi Wu, Yi Xiao. 2022. How do technological innovations affect corporate
investment and hiring?. The North American Journal of Economics and Finance 62, 101759. [Crossref]
7. Qinyi Liu, Belton M. Fleisher. 2022. Job tasks and cognitive skill accumulation. Applied Economics
54:49, 5734-5753. [Crossref]
8. Bangzheng Wu, Weiguo Yang. 2022. Empirical test of the impact of the digital economy on China's
employment structure. Finance Research Letters 49, 103047. [Crossref]
9. Carlos Usabiaga, Fernando Núñez, Lukasz Arendt, Ewa Gałecka-Burdziak, Robert Pater. 2022. Skill
requirements and labour polarisation: An association analysis based on Polish online job offers.
Economic Modelling 115, 105963. [Crossref]
10. Son T. H. Pham, Pauline M. Sampson. 2022. The development of artificial intelligence in education:
A review in context. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 38:5, 1408-1421. [Crossref]
11. Katherine C. Kellogg, Shiri Sadeh-Sharvit. 2022. Pragmatic AI-augmentation in mental healthcare:
Key technologies, potential benefits, and real-world challenges and solutions for frontline clinicians.
Frontiers in Psychiatry 13. . [Crossref]
12. Chee‐Hong Law, Siong Hook Law. 2022. The non‐linear impacts of innovation on unemployment:
Evidence from panel data. International Journal of Finance & Economics 44. . [Crossref]
13. Frank Crowley, Justin Doran. 2022. The geography of job automation in Ireland: what urban areas
are most at risk?. The Annals of Regional Science 29. . [Crossref]
14. Ben Vermeulen, Eleonora Psenner. 2022. Exploiting the technology-driven structural shift to creative
work in regional catching-up: toward an institutional framework. European Planning Studies  30:9,
1798-1823. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 30 ---
15. Giacomo Domini, Marco Grazzi, Daniele Moschella, Tania Treibich. 2022. For whom the bell tolls:
The firm-level effects of automation on wage and gender inequality. Research Policy 51:7, 104533.
[Crossref]
16. Tom Parr. 2022. Automation, unemployment, and insurance. Ethics and Information Technology 24:3. .
[Crossref]
17. Juan Bartolomé, Pablo Garaizar, Xabier Larrucea. 2022. A Pragmatic Approach for Evaluating and
Accrediting Digital Competence of Digital Profiles: A Case Study of Entrepreneurs and Remote
Workers. Technology, Knowledge and Learning 27:3, 843-878. [Crossref]
18. Matthias Klumpp, Caroline Ruiner. 2022. Artificial intelligence, robotics, and logistics employment:
The human factor in digital logistics. Journal of Business Logistics 43:3, 297-301. [Crossref]
19. Andrea Bottalico, Thierry Vanelslander, Patrick Verhoeven. 2022. Innovation and labor in the port
industry: A comparison between Genoa and Antwerp. Journal of Business Logistics  43:3, 368-387.
[Crossref]
20. Dominic Loske. 2022. Empirical evidence on human learning and work characteristics in the transition
to automated order picking. Journal of Business Logistics 43:3, 302-342. [Crossref]
21. Laura Abrardi, Carlo Cambini, Laura Rondi. 2022. Artificial intelligence, firms and consumer
behavior: A survey. Journal of Economic Surveys 36:4, 969-991. [Crossref]
22. Lucrezia Fanti, Dario Guarascio, Massimo Moggi. 2022. From Heron of Alexandria to Amazon’s
Alexa: a stylized history of AI and its impact on business models, organization and work. Journal of
Industrial and Business Economics 49:3, 409-440. [Crossref]
23. Daniel Schiff. 2022. Education for AI, not AI for Education: The Role of Education and Ethics in
National AI Policy Strategies. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 32:3, 527-563.
[Crossref]
24. Esam Mohamed Elgohary, Reham Oncy Abdel‐Aziz. 2022. The effect of digital transformation on
employment in Egypt: An applied study using ARDL model. THE ELECTRONIC JOURNAL OF
INFORMATION SYSTEMS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 27. . [Crossref]
25. Soenke Ehret. 2022. Public preferences for governing AI technology: Comparative evidence. Journal
of European Public Policy 377, 1-20. [Crossref]
26. Christos A. Makridis, Saurabh Mishra. 2022. Artificial Intelligence as a Service, Economic Growth,
and Well-Being. Journal of Service Research 109467052211202. [Crossref]
27. Richard Baldwin, Rebecca Freeman. 2022. Risks and Global Supply Chains: What We Know and
What We Need to Know. Annual Review of Economics 14:1, 153-180. [Crossref]
28. Alex Chernoff, Casey Warman. 2022. COVID-19 and implications for automation. Applied Economics
4, 1-19. [Crossref]
29. Elias Moser. Machines and Technological Unemployment 1336-1356. [Crossref]
30. Grace Lordan, Eliza-Jane Stringer. 2022. People versus machines: The impact of being in an
automatable job on Australian worker’s mental health and life satisfaction. Economics & Human Biology
46, 101144. [Crossref]
31. Esme Terry, Abigail Marks, Arek Dakessian, Dimitris Christopoulos. 2022. Emotional Labour and
the Autonomy of Dependent Self-Employed Workers: The Limitations of Digital Managerial Control
in the Home Credit Sector. Work, Employment and Society 36:4, 665-682. [Crossref]
32. Grischa Beier, Marcel Matthess, Luke Shuttleworth, Ting Guan, David Iubel de Oliveira Pereira
Grudzien, Bing Xue, Edson Pinheiro de Lima, Ling Chen. 2022. Implications of Industry 4.0 on
industrial employment: A comparative survey from Brazilian, Chinese, and German practitioners.
Technology in Society 70, 102028. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 31 ---
33. Yituan Liu, Yabin Bian, Wenhao Zhang. 2022. How Does Enterprises’ Digital Transformation Impact
the Educational Structure of Employees? Evidence from China. Sustainability 14:15, 9432. [Crossref]
34. Seong-Uk Baek, Jin-Ha Yoon, Jong-Uk Won. 2022. Association between Workers’ Anxiety over
Technological Automation and Sleep Disturbance: Results from a Nationally Representative Survey.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19:16, 10051. [Crossref]
35. Tobias Haepp. 2022. New technologies and employee well-being: the role of training provision.
Applied Economics Letters 29:13, 1211-1216. [Crossref]
36. Heyao Yu, Cass Shum, Michelle Alcorn, Jie Sun, Zhaoli He. 2022. Robots can’t take my job:
antecedents and outcomes of Gen Z employees’ service robot risk awareness. International Journal of
Contemporary Hospitality Management 34:8, 2971-2988. [Crossref]
37. Linda A. White, Sumayya Saleem, Elizabeth Dhuey, Michal Perlman. 2022. A critical analysis of
international organizations’ and global management consulting firms’ consensus around twenty-first
century skills. Review of International Political Economy 66, 1-26. [Crossref]
38. Andres Marroquin, Antonio Saravia. 2022. Trust and beliefs about robots in  Latin America.
International Journal of Social Economics 49:8, 1132-1151. [Crossref]
39. Janette Dill, Melissa J Hodges. 2022. The Racialized Glass Escalator and Safety Net: Wages and Job
Quality in “Meds and Eds” among Working-Class Men. Social Problems 69:3, 638-658. [Crossref]
40. Godfred Anakpo, Umakrishnan Kollamparambil. 2022. Artificial intelligence and average wages in
Southern Africa: A panel VAR approach. Development Southern Africa 39:4, 575-588. [Crossref]
41. Mei Xue, Xing Cao, Xu Feng, Bin Gu, Yongjie Zhang. 2022. Is College Education Less Necessary
with AI? Evidence from Firm-Level Labor Structure Changes. Journal of Management Information
Systems 39:3, 865-905. [Crossref]
42. Nicolas Bueno. 2022. From Productive Work to Capability-Enhancing Work: Implications for Labour
Law and Policy. Journal of Human Development and Capabilities 23:3, 354-372. [Crossref]
43. Wenbo Zhu. 2022. Hollowing out and slowing growth: The role of process innovations. Review of
Economic Dynamics 45, 217-236. [Crossref]
44. HEEJUNG CHUNG. 2022. A Social Policy Case for a Four-Day Week. Journal of Social Policy 51:3,
551-566. [Crossref]
45. Matthew Shardlow, Sam Sellar, David Rousell. 2022. Collaborative augmentation and simplification
of text (CoAST): pedagogical applications of natural language processing in digital learning
environments. Learning Environments Research 25:2, 399-421. [Crossref]
46. Chia-Hui Lu. 2022. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND HUMAN JOBS. Macroeconomic
Dynamics 26:5, 1162-1201. [Crossref]
47. Michele Fornino, Andrea Manera. 2022. Automation and the future of work: Assessing the role of
labor flexibility. Review of Economic Dynamics 45, 282-321. [Crossref]
48. Anna Wallin, Petri Nokelainen, Mari Kira. 2022. From Thriving Developers to Stagnant Self-
Doubters: An Identity-Centered Approach to Exploring the Relationship Between Digitalization and
Professional Development. Vocations and Learning 15:2, 285-316. [Crossref]
49. Jean-Philippe Deranty, Thomas Corbin. 2022. Artificial intelligence and work: a critical review of
recent research from the social sciences. AI & SOCIETY 4. . [Crossref]
50. Frank M. Fossen, Daniel Samaan, Alina Sorgner. 2022. How Are Patented AI, Software and Robot
Technologies Related to Wage Changes in the United States?. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence  5. .
[Crossref]
51. Yu-Min Wang, Chung-Lun Wei, Meng-Wei Wang. 2022. Factors influencing students' adoption
intention of brain–computer interfaces in a game-learning context. Library Hi Tech 10. . [Crossref]

--- PAGE 32 ---
52. Karl R. Haapala, Kamyar Raoufi, Kyoung-Yun Kim, Peter F. Orazem, Christopher S. Houck, Michael
D. Johnson, Gül E. Okudan Kremer, Jeremy L. Rickli, Federico M. Sciammarella, Kris Ward. 2022.
Prioritizing actions and outcomes for community-based future manufacturing workforce development
and education. Journal of Integrated Design and Process Science 108, 1-27. [Crossref]
53. Andrea Szalavetz. 2022. Digital technologies shaping the nature and routine intensity of shopfloor
work. Competition & Change 20, 102452942211074. [Crossref]
54. Giorgio P De-Marchis, Sergei Shchebetenko. 2022. Creativity Studies Within the European Union:
A Bibliometric Analysis. Creativity Research Journal 32, 1-22. [Crossref]
55. Tülay TURAN, Gökhan TURAN, Ecir KÜÇÜKSİLLE. 2022. Ethics of Artificial Intelligence:
Impact on Society. Mehmet Akif Ersoy Üniversitesi Fen Bilimleri Enstitüsü Dergisi . [Crossref]
56. Georgiana Mihut. 2022. Does university prestige lead to discrimination in the labor market? Evidence
from a labor market field experiment in three countries. Studies in Higher Education 47:6, 1227-1242.
[Crossref]
57. Dipankar Das. 2022. A Relationship Between the Factor Indivisibility and the Output Elasticity of
the Indivisible Factor. Studies in Microeconomics 10:1, 82-105. [Crossref]
58. Steven W. Hemelt, Tom Swiderski. 2022. College Comes to High School: Participation and
Performance in Tennessee’s Innovative Wave of Dual-Credit Courses. Educational Evaluation and
Policy Analysis 44:2, 313-341. [Crossref]
59. Thomas Bolli, Filippo Pusterla. 2022. Decomposing the effects of digitalization on workers’ job
satisfaction. International Review of Economics 69:2, 263-300. [Crossref]
60. Gilbert Cette, Aurélien Devillard, Vincenzo Spiezia. 2022. Growth Factors in Developed Countries:
A 1960–2019 Growth Accounting Decomposition. Comparative Economic Studies  64:2, 159-185.
[Crossref]
61. Yuan Pan, Fabian J. Froese. 2022. An interdisciplinary review of AI and HRM: Challenges and future
directions. Human Resource Management Review 22, 100924. [Crossref]
62. Jisun Lim, Keun Lee. 2022. Does Innovation by Firms Still Create Jobs even after the Business
Stealing Effect at the Sector Level?. Journal of Economic Policy Reform 13, 1-29. [Crossref]
63. Saija Mauno, Mari Herttalampi, Jaana Minkkinen, Taru Feldt, Bettina Kubicek. 2022. Is work
intensification bad for employees? A review of outcomes for employees over the last two decades.
Work & Stress 52, 1-26. [Crossref]
64. Shafiqul Alam, Pavitra Dhamija. 2022. Human resource development 4.0 (HRD 4.0) in the apparel
industry of Bangladesh: a theoretical framework and future research directions. International Journal
of Manpower 43:2, 263-285. [Crossref]
65. Léo Mignot, Émilien Schultz. 2022. Les innovations d’intelligence artificielle en radiologie à l’épreuve
des régulations du système de santé. Réseaux N° 232-233:2, 65-97. [Crossref]
66. Hong Tien Vu, Jeongsub Lim. 2022. Effects of country and individual factors on public acceptance of
artificial intelligence and robotics technologies: a multilevel SEM analysis of 28-country survey data.
Behaviour & Information Technology 41:7, 1515-1528. [Crossref]
67. Aina Gallego, Thomas Kurer. 2022. Automation, Digitalization, and Artificial Intelligence in the
Workplace: Implications for Political Behavior. Annual Review of Political Science  25:1, 463-484.
[Crossref]
68. Theo Araujo, Ward van Zoonen, Claartje ter Hoeven. 2022. “A Large Playground”: Examining the
Current State and Implications of Conversational Agent Adoption in Organizations. International
Journal of Innovation and Technology Management 47. . [Crossref]

--- PAGE 33 ---
69. Klaudia Martinek-Jaguszewska, Waldemar Rogowski. 2022. Development and Validation of the
Business Process Automation Maturity Model: Results of the Delphi Study. Information Systems
Management 102, 1-17. [Crossref]
70. Johnatan Corrales Bonilla, Neuza Ribeiro, Daniel Roque Gomes. 2022. Las competencias exigidas
a los trabajadores de la Industria 4.0: Cambios en la gestión de personas. Cuadernos de Relaciones
Laborales 40:1, 161-184. [Crossref]
71. Lixing Li, Yiqing Mo, Guangsu Zhou. 2022. Platform economy and China’s labor market: structural
transformation and policy challenges. China Economic Journal 15:2, 139-152. [Crossref]
72. Alexandre Ardichvili. 2022. The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Expertise Development:
Implications for HRD. Advances in Developing Human Resources 24:2, 78-98. [Crossref]
73. Thor Berger, Per Engzell. 2022. Industrial automation and intergenerational income mobility in the
United States. Social Science Research 104, 102686. [Crossref]
74. Búi K Petersen, James Chowhan, Gordon B Cooke, Ray Gosine, Peter J Warrian. 2022. Automation
and the future of work: An intersectional study of the role of human capital, income, gender and
visible minority status. Economic and Industrial Democracy 1989, 0143831X2210883. [Crossref]
75. Haohui Caron Chen, Xun Li, Morgan Frank, Xiaozhen Qin, Weipan Xu, Manuel Cebrian, Iyad
Rahwan. 2022. Automation impacts on China’s polarized job market. Journal of Computational Social
Science 5:1, 517-535. [Crossref]
76. Rachel Petragallo, Naomi Bardach, Ezequiel Ramirez, James M. Lamb. 2022. Barriers and facilitators
to clinical implementation of radiotherapy treatment planning automation: A survey study of medical
dosimetrists. Journal of Applied Clinical Medical Physics 23:5. . [Crossref]
77. Pooya Adami, Patrick B. Rodrigues, Peter J. Woods, Burcin Becerik-Gerber, Lucio Soibelman,
Yasemin Copur-Gencturk, Gale Lucas. 2022. Impact of VR-Based Training on Human–Robot
Interaction for Remote Operating Construction Robots. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering
36:3. . [Crossref]
78. Dong Yang, W. G. (Will) Zhao, Jingjing Du, Yimin Yang. 2022. Approaching Artificial Intelligence in
business and economics research:a bibliometric panorama (1966–2020). Technology Analysis & Strategic
Management 11, 1-16. [Crossref]
79. Linda KaroliinaNieminen, Jari Juhani Vuori, Harri Juhani Ketamo, Markku Juhani Kankaanpaa.
Applying Semantic Computing for Health Care Professionals: the Timing of Intervention is the Key
for Successful Rehabilitation 201-206. [Crossref]
80. P . A. Hancock. 2022. Machining the mind to mind the machine. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics
Science 1, 1-18. [Crossref]
81. Rod Tyers, Yixiao Zhou. 2022. Automation and inequality with taxes and transfers. Scottish Journal
of Political Economy 29. . [Crossref]
82. Asim Talukdar, Anirban Ganguly. 2022. A dark side of e-HRM: mediating role of HR service
delivery and HR socialization on HR effectiveness. International Journal of Manpower 43:1, 116-147.
[Crossref]
83. Pedro Bação, Vanessa Gaudêncio Lopes, Marta Simões. 2022. AI, Demand and the Impact of
Productivity-enhancing Technology on Jobs: Evidence from Portugal. Eastern European Economics
7, 1-25. [Crossref]
84. Terry Gregory, Anna Salomons, Ulrich Zierahn. 2022. Racing With or Against the Machine? Evidence
on the Role of Trade in Europe. Journal of the European Economic Association 20:2, 869-906. [Crossref]
85. Tuomo Alasoini, Seppo Tuomivaara. 2022. Occupational change, computer use and the
complementarity effect in the digital age: Evidence from Finland. Economic and Industrial Democracy
58, 0143831X2210896. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 34 ---
86. Naomitsu Yashiro, Tomi Kyyrä, Hyunjeong Hwang, Juha Tuomala. 2022. Technology, labour market
institutions and early retirement. Economic Policy 33. . [Crossref]
87. Yuyang Kang, Ka Ho Mok. 2022. The Broken Promise of Human Capital Theory: Social
Embeddedness, Graduate Entrepreneurs and Youth Employment in China. Critical Sociology  1,
089692052210888. [Crossref]
88. Peter Čajka. 2022. The Importance of the Knowledge Economy as a Tool for Increasing
Competitiveness. Politické vedy 25:1, 238-264. [Crossref]
89. Antonio Paolillo, Fabrizio Colella, Nicola Nosengo, Fabrizio Schiano, William Stewart, Davide
Zambrano, Isabelle Chappuis, Rafael Lalive, Dario Floreano. 2022. How to compete with robots by
assessing job automation risks and resilient alternatives. Science Robotics 7:65. . [Crossref]
90. WanQing Wei, LinYu Li. 2022. The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on the Mental Health of
Manufacturing Workers: The Mediating Role of Overtime Work and the Work Environment.
Frontiers in Public Health 10. . [Crossref]
91. Debra Howcroft, Phil Taylor. 2022. Automation and the future of work: A social shaping of
technology approach. New Technology, Work and Employment 27. . [Crossref]
92. Andreas Beerli, Ronald Indergand, Johannes S. Kunz. 2022. The supply of foreign talent: how skill-
biased technology drives the location choice and skills of new immigrants. Journal of Population
Economics 108. . [Crossref]
93. Limeng Ying, Xiaojing Liu, Menghao Li, Lipeng Sun, Pishi Xiu, Jie Yang. 2022. How does intelligent
manufacturing affects enterprise innovation? The mediating role of organisational learning. Enterprise
Information Systems 16:4, 630-667. [Crossref]
94. Néstor Duch-Brown, Estrella Gomez-Herrera, Frank Mueller-Langer, Songül Tolan. 2022. Market
power and artificial intelligence work on online labour markets. Research Policy  51:3, 104446.
[Crossref]
95. Charlotte Arkenback-Sundström. 2022. A Postdigital Perspective on Service Work: Salespeople’s
Service Encounters in the Connected Store. Postdigital Science and Education 4:2, 422-446. [Crossref]
96. Per-Anders Edin, Peter Fredriksson, Martin Nybom, Björn Öckert. 2022. The Rising Return to
Noncognitive Skill. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics  14:2, 78-100. [ Abstract] [View
PDF article] [PDF with links]
97. Valeria Cirillo, Lucrezia Fanti, Andrea Mina, Andrea Ricci. 2022. New digital technologies and firm
performance in the Italian economy. Industry and Innovation 87, 1-30. [Crossref]
98. Jiyong Park, Jongho Kim. 2022. A data-driven exploration of the race between human labor and
machines in the 21 st century. Communications of the ACM 65:5, 79-87. [Crossref]
99. Bruno Ottoni, Paulo Rocha e Oliveira, Lucas Estrela, Ana Tereza Santos, Tiago Barreira. 2022.
Automation and job loss: the Brazilian case. Nova Economia 32:1, 157-180. [Crossref]
100. Mawunyo Agradi, Philip K. Adom, Andrea Vezzulli. 2022. Towards sustainability: Does energy
efficiency reduce unemployment in African societies?. Sustainable Cities and Society  79, 103683.
[Crossref]
101. Joan Torrent-Sellens, Ángel Díaz-Chao, Albert-Pol Miró-Pérez, Jorge Sainz. 2022. Towards the
Tyrell corporation? Digitisation, firm-size and productivity divergence in Spain. Journal of Innovation
& Knowledge 7:2, 100185. [Crossref]
102. Jennifer Hunt, Ryan Nunn. 2022. Has U.S. employment really polarized? A critical reappraisal. Labour
Economics 75, 102117. [Crossref]
103. Xing Zhao, Sasa Yang. 2022. Does Intelligence Improve the Efficiency of Technological Innovation?.
Journal of the Knowledge Economy 108. . [Crossref]

--- PAGE 35 ---
104. Lilla Vicsek, Tamás Bokor, Gyöngyvér Pataki. 2022. Younger generations’ expectations regarding
artificial intelligence in the job market: Mapping accounts about the future relationship of automation
and work. Journal of Sociology 144078332210893. [Crossref]
105. Pengqing Zhang. 2022. Can public subsidy on education reduce wage inequality in the presence of
automation?. Economic Research-Ekonomska Istraživanja 50, 1-17. [Crossref]
106. Marius R Busemeyer, Mia Gandenberger, Carlo Knotz, Tobias Tober. 2022. Preferred policy
responses to technological change: Survey evidence from OECD countries. Socio-Economic Review
19. . [Crossref]
107. Phaphon Plumwongrot, Piriya Pholphirul. 2022. Are Robots stealing jobs? Empirical evidence from
10 developing countries. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 20, 1-17. [Crossref]
108. Michael Jones, Sandra Idrovo-Carlier, Alfredo J. Rodriguez. 2022. Automation in Colombia: assessing
skills needed for the future of work. Higher Education, Skills and Work-Based Learning 12:2, 225-240.
[Crossref]
109. Dipankar Das. 2022. Understanding the choice of human resource and the artificial intelligence:
“strategic behavior” and the existence of industry equilibrium. Journal of Economic Studies  12. .
[Crossref]
110. Ashleigh Brady, Neelam Naikar. 2022. Development of Rasmussen’s risk management framework for
analysing multi-level sociotechnical influences in the design of envisioned work systems. Ergonomics
65:3, 485-518. [Crossref]
111. 2022. Logistics 4.0 Skills Requirements: Evidence from a Developing Country. Canadian Journal of
Business and Information Studies 24-36. [Crossref]
112. Wil Hunt, Sudipa Sarkar, Chris Warhurst. 2022. Measuring the impact of AI on jobs at the
organization level: Lessons from a survey of UK business leaders. Research Policy  51:2, 104425.
[Crossref]
113. María García-Vega. 2022. R&D restructuring during the Great Recession and young firms.
International Journal of Industrial Organization 81, 102819. [Crossref]
114. Oliver Giering. 2022. Künstliche Intelligenz und Arbeit: Betrachtungen zwischen Prognose und
betrieblicher Realität. Zeitschrift für Arbeitswissenschaft 76:1, 50-64. [Crossref]
115. Jacob Rubæk Holm, Edward Lorenz. 2022. The impact of artificial intelligence on skills at work in
Denmark. New Technology, Work and Employment 37:1, 79-101. [Crossref]
116. Stefania Innocenti, Marta Golin. 2022. Human capital investment and perceived automation risks:
Evidence from 16 countries. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 195, 27-41. [Crossref]
117. Shai Satran. 2022. From Craft to Labor: How Automation is Transforming the Practice of
Psychotherapy. Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 29. . [Crossref]
118. Amy Van Looy. 2022. Employees’ attitudes towards intelligent robots: a dilemma analysis. Information
Systems and e-Business Management 108. . [Crossref]
119. Bettina Boncz, Roland Zs. Szabó. 2022. A mesterséges intelligencia munkaerő-piaci hatásai Hogyan
készüljünk fel?. Vezetéstudomány / Budapest Management Review 53:2, 68-80. [Crossref]
120. Anjali Singh, Sumi Jha, Dinesh Kumar Srivastava, Abheesh Somarajan. 2022. Future of work: a
systematic literature review and evolution of themes. foresight 24:1, 99-125. [Crossref]
121. Oxana Krutova, Tuuli Turja, Pertti Koistinen, Harri Melin, Tuomo Särkikoski. 2022. Job insecurity
and technology acceptance: an asymmetric dependence. Journal of Information, Communication and
Ethics in Society 20:1, 110-133. [Crossref]
122. Gabriel López-Martínez, Francisco Eduardo Haz-Gómez, Salvador Manzanera-Román. 2022.
Identities and Precariousness in the Collaborative Economy, Neither Wage-Earner, nor Self-

--- PAGE 36 ---
Employed: Emergence and Consolidation of the Homo Rider, a Case Study. Societies 12:1, 6.
[Crossref]
123. Jared Berry Fitzgerald. 2022. Working time, inequality and carbon emissions in the United States: A
multi-dividend approach to climate change mitigation. Energy Research & Social Science 84, 102385.
[Crossref]
124. AndrÉ Hoorn. 2022. Automatability of Work and Preferences for Redistribution*. Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics 84:1, 130-157. [Crossref]
125. Marcel Steffen Eckardt. 2022. Minimum wages in an automating economy. Journal of Public Economic
Theory 24:1, 58-91. [Crossref]
126. Chi-Wei Su, Xi Yuan, Muhammad Umar, Oana-Ramona Lobonţ. 2022. Does technological
innovation bring destruction or creation to the labor market?. Technology in Society  68, 101905.
[Crossref]
127. Alain Cohn, Tobias Gesche, Michel André Maréchal. 2022. Honesty in the Digital Age. Management
Science 68:2, 827-845. [Crossref]
128. Frank M. Fossen, Alina Sorgner. 2022. New digital technologies and heterogeneous wage and
employment dynamics in the United States: Evidence from individual-level data. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 175, 121381. [Crossref]
129. Paolo Barbieri, Filippo Gioachin. 2022. Social origin and secondary labour market entry: Ascriptive
and institutional inequalities over the early career in Italy and Germany. Research in Social Stratification
and Mobility 77, 100670. [Crossref]
130. Bruce G. Carruthers. Information and Markets: Toward a Critical Sociological Appreciation of F.A.
Hayek 115-134. [Crossref]
131. David Klenert, Enrique Fernández-Macías, José-Ignacio Antón. 2022. Do robots really destroy jobs?
Evidence from Europe. Economic and Industrial Democracy 110, 0143831X2110688. [Crossref]
132. Fatine Biaz, Martine Brasseur. 2022. A l’encontre d’une digitalisation inclusive dans les organisations :
l’émergence d’un e-taylorisme chez les cadres. Gestion 2000 Volume 38:4, 39-58. [Crossref]
133. John Heywood. 2022. Designing Engineering and Technology Curricula: Embedding Educational
Philosophy. Synthesis Lectures on Engineering, Science, and Technology 4:2, 1-163. [Crossref]
134. Paulo Dias, Sílvia Lopes, Ricardo Peixoto. 2022. Mastering new technologies: does it relate to
teleworkers’ (in)voluntariness and well-being?. Journal of Knowledge Management 92. . [Crossref]
135. Martin Cimiterra, Jackie Krafft, Lionel Nesta. 2022. Blockchain as Schumpeter Mark 1 or Mark 2? An
empirical analysis of blockchain job offers in France and Germany. Industrial and Corporate Change
30:6, 1388-1402. [Crossref]
136. Junwei Shi, Hongyan Liu. 2022. Wage increase and innovation in manufacturing industries: Evidence
from China. Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy 27:1, 173-198. [Crossref]
137. Manuel Alejandro Barajas Bustillos, Aide Aracely Maldonado-Macías, Jorge Luis García-Alcaraz, Juan
Luis Hernández Arellano, Liliana Avelar Sosa. Considerations of the Mental Workload in Socio-
Technical Systems in the Manufacturing Industry 66-84. [Crossref]
138. Josipa Višić. Robots and Economics 20-34. [Crossref]
139. Ozge Doguc. Robot Process Automation (RPA) and Its Future 35-58. [Crossref]
140. Ayansola Olatunji Ayandibu. Teaching How to Work With People (In Person and Remotely) and
Technology (Artificial Intelligence and Robots) Using Creativity and Innovation 134-146. [Crossref]
141. Samuel Collino, Giancarlo Lauto. Reducing Cognitive Biases Through Digitally Enabled Training.
A Conceptual Framework 179-191. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 37 ---
142. Richard Duhautois, Christine Erhel, Mathilde Guergoat-Larivière, Malo Mofakhami. 2022. More
and Better Jobs, But Not for Everyone: Effects of Innovation in French Firms. ILR Review 75:1,
90-116. [Crossref]
143. Aina Gallego, Alexander Kuo, Dulce Manzano, José Fernández-Albertos. 2022. Technological Risk
and Policy Preferences. Comparative Political Studies 55:1, 60-92. [Crossref]
144. Heski Bar-Isaac, Raphaël Lévy. 2022. Motivating Employees through Career Paths. Journal of Labor
Economics 40:1, 95-131. [Crossref]
145. Christoffer Andersson, Anette Hallin, Chris Ivory. 2022. Unpacking the digitalisation of public
services: Configuring work during automation in local government. Government Information Quarterly
39:1, 101662. [Crossref]
146. Ningning Guo. 2022. Hollowing Out of Opportunity: Automation Technology and Intergenerational
Mobility in the United States. Labour Economics 43, 102136. [Crossref]
147. Carola Burkert, Katharina Dengler, Britta Matthes. 2022. Die Folgen der Digitalisierung
für die Geschlechterungleichheit auf dem Arbeitsmarkt  – Substituierbarkeitspotenziale und die
Beschäftigungsentwicklung bei Frauen und Männern. Sozialer Fortschritt 71:1, 3-27. [Crossref]
148. Susan Ainsworth, Angela Knox. 2022. “A bridge too far?” Ideas, employment relations and policy‐
making about the future of work. Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 61:1, 68-89.
[Crossref]
149. Lucila Carvalho, Roberto Martinez-Maldonado, Yi-Shan Tsai, Lina Markauskaite, Maarten De Laat.
2022. How can we design for learning in an AI world?. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence
3, 100053. [Crossref]
150. Bishakha Majumdar. Mental Health and the Working Professional 233-256. [Crossref]
151. Francesca Sgobbi, Lino Codara. Resilience Capability and Successful Adoption of Digital
Technologies: Two Case Studies 309-327. [Crossref]
152. Italo Colantone, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Piero Stanig. The backlash of globalization 405-477.
[Crossref]
153. Fabio Montobbio, Jacopo Staccioli, Maria Enrica Virgillito, Marco Vivarelli. 2022. Robots and
the origin of their labour-saving impact. Technological Forecasting and Social Change  174, 121122.
[Crossref]
154. Vegard Skirbekk. Money Matters: The Economics of Fertility 247-263. [Crossref]
155. Erling Barth, James C. Davis, Richard B. Freeman, Kristina McElheran. 2022. Twisting the demand
curve: Digitalization and the older workforce. Journal of Econometrics 94. . [Crossref]
156. Regina Pleninger, Jakob Haan, Jan‐Egbert Sturm. 2022. The ‘Forgotten’ middle class: An analysis of
the effects of globalisation. The World Economy 45:1, 76-110. [Crossref]
157. Yuyang Kang. Barriers in the Commencement of Entrepreneurship for University Graduates in China’s
Greater Bay Area: Human Capital or Social Capital? 231-244. [Crossref]
158. Angel Dacal-Nieto, Greg Agriopoulos, Teresa Méndez, Julián D. Calle, Rubén Paz-Cibeira,
Vasilapostolos Ouranis, Carmen Fernández-González. 2022. TRAINMAN-MAGOS: capture of
dexterous assembly manufacturing know-how as a new efficient approach to support robotic
automation. Procedia Computer Science 200, 101-110. [Crossref]
159. M. G. Ortoleva, S. M. Messina. Artificial Intelligence and Robots: The Role of Tax Legislator, A
Conundrum to Solve 135-142. [Crossref]
160. Askar Akaev, Nabi Ziadullaev, Askar Sarygulov, Alexander Petryakov. Digital Transformation and
Growth Models 87-112. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 38 ---
161. Sabrina Inez Weller. Einfluss von assistiven Technologien auf die Tätigkeiten Erwerbstätiger mit
verschiedenen Behinderungsarten 337-357. [Crossref]
162. Nico Kling, Chantal Runte, Sajal Kabiraj, Christian-Andreas Schumann. Harnessing Sustainable
Development in Image Recognition Through No-Code AI Applications: A Comparative Analysis
146-155. [Crossref]
163. John Heywood. Technology and the Changing Structure of the Workforce 57-75. [Crossref]
164. Andrea Signoretti, Lucia Pederiva, Enrico Zaninotto. 2022. Trading‐off flexibility: Contingent
workers or human resource practices? A configurational approach. Human Resource Management
Journal 32:1, 58-75. [Crossref]
165. Sarah Lebovitz, Hila Lifshitz-Assaf, Natalia Levina. 2022. To Engage or Not to Engage with AI for
Critical Judgments: How Professionals Deal with Opacity When Using AI for Medical Diagnosis.
Organization Science 33:1, 126-148. [Crossref]
166. Ryan Allen, Prithwiraj (Raj) Choudhury. 2022. Algorithm-Augmented Work and Domain
Experience: The Countervailing Forces of Ability and Aversion. Organization Science 33:1, 149-169.
[Crossref]
167. I. M. Chernenko, N. R. Kelchevskaya, I. S. Pelymskaya, V. N. Vasina. The Probability of Profession
Computerization and Its Impact on Wage Differentials: Case of the Russian Labor Market Digitization
789-802. [Crossref]
168. Peliwe Lolwana. No One Left Behind: The Implications of the 4th Industrial Revolution on the
Developmental Agenda of the BRICS Countries 137-154. [Crossref]
169. Tiko Iyamu, Nontobeko Mlambo. 2022. Actor-Network Theory Perspective of Robotic Process
Automation Implementation in the Banking Sector. International Journal of Information Technologies
and Systems Approach 15:1, 1-17. [Crossref]
170. Bishakha Majumdar, Sushanta Kumar Mishra, Pawan Budhwar. Human Resource Management in
the Twenty-First Century: Present Stand and the Emerging Trends in Indian Organizations 217-252.
[Crossref]
171. Vinícius Mendes. 2022. A economia política da inteligência artificial: o caso da Alemanha. Revista de
Sociologia e Política 30. . [Crossref]
172. Laura Pylväs, Junmin Li, Petri Nokelainen. Professional Growth and Workplace Learning 137-155.
[Crossref]
173. Makoto Usami. Digitization, Unemployment, and Distributive Justice 65-87. [Crossref]
174. Gary Knight, Zaheer Khan. Effects of Emerging Technologies on International Business 217-235.
[Crossref]
175. Philipp Brauner, Luisa Vervier, Florian Brillowski, Hannah Dammers, Linda Steuer-Dankert,
Sebastian Schneider, Ralph Baier, Martina Ziefle, Thomas Gries, Carmen Leicht-Scholten, Alexander
Mertens, Saskia K. Nagel. Organization Routines in Next Generation Manufacturing 75-94. [Crossref]
176. David James, Sahara Sadik, Phillip Brown. Rethinking Lifelong Learning in the “Fourth Industrial
Revolution” 1-20. [Crossref]
177. Anna-Maria Kanzola. Restructuring the Greek Labor Market During the Last Two Economic Crises
229-240. [Crossref]
178. Pantelis C. Kostis, Kyriaki I. Kafka. The European Experience in Lifelong Learning and the
Restructuring of the Economy 241-260. [Crossref]
179. James Chamberlain, Denise Celentano, Keally McBride. Technology and the Future of Work 99-117.
[Crossref]

--- PAGE 39 ---
180. Steven Dhondt, Karolus O. Kraan, Michiel Bal. 2021. Organisation, technological change and skills use
over time: A longitudinal study on linked employee surveys. New Technology, Work and Employment
25. . [Crossref]
181. María López-Martínez, Olga García-Luque, Myriam Rodríguez-Pasquín. 2021. Digital Gender Divide
and Convergence in the European Union Countries. Economics 15:1, 115-128. [Crossref]
182. Urmat Dzhunkeev. 2021. Modelling the impact of digital technologies on the unemployment rate in
Russia. Moscow University Economics Bulletin :6, 186-201. [Crossref]
183. Aníbal Monasterio Astobiza. 2021. Inteligencia Artificial para el bien común (AI4SG): IA y los
Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible. Arbor 197:802, a629. [Crossref]
184. Mehmet KAYA. 2021. SANAYİ 4.0, İŞGÜCÜ PİYASASI VE BİLGİ İŞÇİLİĞİ. The Journal of
International Lingual Social and Educational Sciences . [Crossref]
185. Viktória Endrődi-Kovács, Tamás Stukovszky. 2021. The adoption of industry 4.0 and digitalisation
of Hungarian SMEs. Society and Economy 6. . [Crossref]
186. Lei Wang, Provash Sarker, Kausar Alam, Shahneoaj Sumon. 2021. Artificial Intelligence and
Economic Growth: A Theoretical Framework. Scientific Annals of Economics and Business  68:4,
421-443. [Crossref]
187. Louis Chauvel, Eyal Bar Haim, Anne Hartung, Emily Murphy. 2021. Rewealthization in twenty-first
century Western countries: the defining trend of the socioeconomic squeeze of the middle class. The
Journal of Chinese Sociology 8:1. . [Crossref]
188. Anneliese Arno, Julian Elliott, Byron Wallace, Tari Turner, James Thomas. 2021. The views of health
guideline developers on the use of automation in health evidence synthesis. Systematic Reviews 10:1. .
[Crossref]
189. Laura S. Zilian, Stella S. Zilian, Georg Jäger. 2021. Labour market polarisation revisited: evidence
from Austrian vacancy data. Journal for Labour Market Research 55:1. . [Crossref]
190. Wenjing Lyu, Jin Liu. 2021. Artificial Intelligence and emerging digital technologies in the energy
sector. Applied Energy 303, 117615. [Crossref]
191. Théophile Demazure, Alexander Karran, Pierre-Majorique Léger, Élise Labonté-LeMoyne, Sylvain
Sénécal, Marc Fredette, Gilbert Babin. 2021. Enhancing Sustained Attention. Business & Information
Systems Engineering 63:6, 653-668. [Crossref]
192. Marco Bellandi, Lisa De Propris. 2021. Local Productive Systems’ Transitions to Industry 4.0+.
Sustainability 13:23, 13052. [Crossref]
193. Helena Lopes, Teresa Calapez. 2021. Job polarisation: Capturing the effects of work organisation.
The Economic and Labour Relations Review 32:4, 594-613. [Crossref]
194. Annie Tubadji, Haoran Huang, Don J Webber. 2021. Cultural proximity bias in AI-acceptability:
The importance of being human. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 173, 121100. [Crossref]
195. Dominic Loske, Matthias Klumpp, Maria Keil, Thomas Neukirchen. 2021. Logistics Work,
Ergonomics and Social Sustainability: Empirical Musculoskeletal System Strain Assessment in Retail
Intralogistics. Logistics 5:4, 89. [Crossref]
196. Randhir Kumar, Niels Beerepoot. 2021. Matching global service standards—the role of intermediaries
in economic upgrading of support-service firms in global production networks. Journal of Economic
Geography 21:6, 899-923. [Crossref]
197. Uwe Neumann. 2021. Lebenslanges Lernen als Standortfaktor?. Zeitschrift für Wirtschaftspolitik 70:3,
282-303. [Crossref]
198. Pavel Okopnyi, Frode Guribye, Valentina Caruso, Oskar Juhlin. 2021. Automation and redistribution
of work: the impact of social distancing on live TV production. Human–Computer Interaction 2,
1-24. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 40 ---
199. Luca Antonazzo, Dean Stroud, Martin Weinel. 2021. Institutional complementarities and
technological transformation: IVET responsiveness to Industry 4.0 – meeting emerging skill needs
in the European steel industry. Economic and Industrial Democracy 0143831X2110592. [Crossref]
200. Barbara Hof. 2021. Mais qui est donc le monstre ? À propos d’agentivité et de responsabilité dans la
relation entre l’humain et la machine. Mémoire(s), identité(s), marginalité(s) dans le monde occidental
contemporain :26. . [Crossref]
201. Gwanhoo Lee, Min-Seok Pang. 2021. How are service automation and national ICT development
associated with international trade in services?. Information Technology for Development  4, 1-23.
[Crossref]
202. Maarten Renkema. AI, Digitalisation, and HRM: Foundations, Extensions, and New Directions on
AI, Digitalisation, and HRM 77-96. [Crossref]
203. Sergio Torrejón Pérez, Ignacio González Vázquez. The Impact of Technology on the Present and the
Future of Work and Skills 119-141. [Crossref]
204. Raúl Katz, Fernando Callorda, Juan Jung. 2021. The impact of automation on employment and
its social implications: evidence from Chile. Economics of Innovation and New Technology  6, 1-17.
[Crossref]
205. Pierre-Alexandre Balland, Ron Boschma. 2021. Mapping the potentials of regions in Europe to
contribute to new knowledge production in Industry 4.0 technologies. Regional Studies 55:10-11,
1652-1666. [Crossref]
206. Frank Crowley, Justin Doran, Philip McCann. 2021. The vulnerability of European regional labour
markets to job automation: the role of agglomeration externalities. Regional Studies  55:10-11,
1711-1723. [Crossref]
207. Lisa De Propris, David Bailey. 2021. Pathways of regional transformation and Industry 4.0. Regional
Studies 55:10-11, 1617-1629. [Crossref]
208. Lisa De Propris, Marco Bellandi. 2021. Regions beyond Industry 4.0. Regional Studies 55:10-11,
1609-1616. [Crossref]
209. Luca Cattani, Giulio Pedrini. 2021. Opening the black-box of graduates’ horizontal skills: diverging
labour market outcomes in Italy. Studies in Higher Education 46:11, 2387-2404. [Crossref]
210. Elias Moser. 2021. Against robot taxes: scrutinizing the moral reasons for the preservation of work.
AI and Ethics 1:4, 491-499. [Crossref]
211. Rita Latikka, Nina Savela, Aki Koivula, Atte Oksanen. 2021. Attitudes Toward Robots as Equipment
and Coworkers and the Impact of Robot Autonomy Level. International Journal of Social Robotics
13:7, 1747-1759. [Crossref]
212. Stephen Drinkwater. 2021. Brexit and the ‘left behind’: Job polarization and the rise in support for
leaving the European Union. Industrial Relations Journal 52:6, 569-588. [Crossref]
213. Luísa Nazareno, Daniel S. Schiff. 2021. The impact of automation and artificial intelligence on worker
well-being. Technology in Society 67, 101679. [Crossref]
214. Md Uzir Hossain Uzir, Hussam Al Halbusi, Rodney Lim, Ishraq Jerin, Abu Bakar Abdul Hamid,
Thurasamy Ramayah, Ahasanul Haque. 2021. Applied Artificial Intelligence and user satisfaction:
Smartwatch usage for healthcare in Bangladesh during COVID-19. Technology in Society 67, 101780.
[Crossref]
215. Michael A. Zaggl, Judith Pottbäcker. 2021. Facilitators and inhibitors for integrating expertise
diversity in innovation teams: The case of plasmid exchange in molecular biology. Research Policy
50:9, 104313. [Crossref]
216. Pierre Nguimkeu, Cedric Okou. 2021. Leveraging digital technologies to boost productivity in the
informal sector in Sub‐Saharan Africa. Review of Policy Research 38:6, 707-731. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 41 ---
217. Willian Boschetti Adamczyk, Leonardo Monasterio, Adelar Fochezatto. 2021. Automation in the
future of public sector employment: the case of Brazilian Federal Government. Technology in Society
67, 101722. [Crossref]
218. Sebastián Fernández Franco, Juan M. Graña. 2021. Los enfoques económicos actuales sobre tecnología
y empleo. Una crítica a sus omisiones compartidas. Cuadernos de Relaciones Laborales 39:2, 351-370.
[Crossref]
219. Banu Ozkazanc-Pan. 2021. Diversity and future of work: inequality abound or opportunities for all?.
Management Decision 59:11, 2645-2659. [Crossref]
220. Arne L. Kalleberg, Kevin T. Leicht. 2021. United States: eight key themes in sociology of work. La
Nouvelle Revue du Travail :19. . [Crossref]
221. Arne L. Kalleberg, Kevin T. Leicht. 2021. États-Unis : huit thématiques clés de la sociologie du
travail. La Nouvelle Revue du Travail :19. . [Crossref]
222. Martin Krzywdzinski. 2021. Automation, digitalization, and changes in occupational structures in the
automobile industry in Germany, Japan, and the United States: a brief history from the early 1990s
until 2018. Industrial and Corporate Change 30:3, 499-535. [Crossref]
223. Joan Torrent-Sellens, Pilar Ficapal-Cusí, Myriam Ertz. Motivations for Labour Provision on Digital
Platforms in Europe 81-103. [Crossref]
224. Jennings Byrd, Paige Paquette. 2021. Frankenstein: a creation of artificial intelligence?. AI &
SOCIETY 108. . [Crossref]
225. M.A. Sinclair, M.J.deC. Henshaw, S.L. Henshaw. 2021. On building sustainable communities: A
perspective for HFE practitioners. Applied Ergonomics 96, 103476. [Crossref]
226. Christoph Keding, Philip Meissner. 2021. Managerial overreliance on AI-augmented decision-making
processes: How the use of AI-based advisory systems shapes choice behavior in R&D investment
decisions. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 171, 120970. [Crossref]
227. Milan Frederik Klus, Julia Müller. 2021. The digital leader: what one needs to master today’s
organisational challenges. Journal of Business Economics 91:8, 1189-1223. [Crossref]
228. Anita Hammer, Suparna Karmakar. 2021. Automation, AI and the Future of Work in India. Employee
Relations: The International Journal 43:6, 1327-1341. [Crossref]
229. Malar Hirudayaraj, Rose Baker, Francie Baker, Mike Eastman. 2021. Soft Skills for Entry-Level
Engineers: What Employers Want. Education Sciences 11:10, 641. [Crossref]
230. Hui Jiang, Lin Cheng. 2021. Public Perception and Reception of Robotic Applications in Public
Health Emergencies Based on a Questionnaire Survey Conducted during COVID-19. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18:20, 10908. [Crossref]
231. Jan Bena, Hernán Ortiz-Molina, Elena Simintzi. 2021. Shielding Firm Value: Employment Protection
and Process Innovation. Journal of Financial Economics 27. . [Crossref]
232. Florian Brachten, Tobias Kissmer, Stefan Stieglitz. 2021. The acceptance of chatbots in an enterprise
context – A survey study. International Journal of Information Management 60, 102375. [Crossref]
233. Colin P . Green, Likun Mao, Vincent O'Sullivan. 2021. Internet usage and the cognitive function of
retirees. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 190, 747-767. [Crossref]
234. Olga I. Maslak, Mariya V. Maslak, Natalya Ye. Grishko, Olha O. Hlazunova, Petro G. Pererva, Yaroslava
Yu. Yakovenko. Artificial Intelligence as a Key Driver of Business Operations Transformation in the
Conditions of the Digital Economy 1-5. [Crossref]
235. Szufang Chuang. 2021. An empirical study of displaceable job skills in the age of robots. European
Journal of Training and Development 45:6/7, 617-632. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 42 ---
236. Maarten Goos, Emilie Rademakers, Ronja Röttger. 2021. Routine-Biased technical change:
Individual-Level evidence from a plant closure. Research Policy 50:7, 104002. [Crossref]
237. Valeria Cirillo, Rinaldo Evangelista, Dario Guarascio, Matteo Sostero. 2021. Digitalization,
routineness and employment: An exploration on Italian task-based data. Research Policy 50:7, 104079.
[Crossref]
238. Oliver Falck, Alexandra Heimisch-Roecker, Simon Wiederhold. 2021. Returns to ICT skills. Research
Policy 50:7, 104064. [Crossref]
239. Tommaso Ciarli, Martin Kenney, Silvia Massini, Lucia Piscitello. 2021. Digital technologies,
innovation, and skills: Emerging trajectories and challenges. Research Policy 50:7, 104289. [Crossref]
240. Nuno Boavida, Marta Candeias. 2021. Recent Automation Trends in Portugal: Implications on
Industrial Productivity and Employment in Automotive Sector. Societies 11:3, 101. [Crossref]
241. Rodrigo Morem da Costa, Carlos Henrique Horn. 2021. The co-evolution of technology and
employment relations: Institutions, innovation and change. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics
58, 313-324. [Crossref]
242. Vijay Pereira, Elias Hadjielias, Michael Christofi, Demetris Vrontis. 2021. A systematic literature
review on the impact of artificial intelligence on workplace outcomes: A multi-process perspective.
Human Resource Management Review 14, 100857. [Crossref]
243. Adrian Smith, Mariano Fressoli. 2021. Post-automation. Futures 132, 102778. [Crossref]
244. Giacomo Domini, Marco Grazzi, Daniele Moschella, Tania Treibich. 2021. Threats and opportunities
in the digital era: Automation spikes and employment dynamics. Research Policy  50:7, 104137.
[Crossref]
245. Dennis Schlegel, Patrick Kraus. 2021. Skills and competencies for digital transformation – a critical
analysis in the context of robotic process automation. International Journal of Organizational Analysis
11. . [Crossref]
246. Alexandra K. Przegalinska, Robert E. Wright. 2021. AI: UBI Income Portfolio Adjustment to
Technological Transformation. Frontiers in Human Dynamics 3. . [Crossref]
247. Anett Friedrich. 2021. Task composition and vocational education and training – a firm level
perspective. Journal of Vocational Education & Training 1-24. [Crossref]
248. Asif Mahmood, Asif Arshad Ali, Muhammad Nazam, Muhammad Nazim. 2021. Developing an
interplay among the psychological barriers for the adoption of industry 4.0 phenomenon. PLOS ONE
16:8, e0255115. [Crossref]
249. Adam Sargent, Alexandra H Vinson, Reed Stevens. 2021. Sensing defects: Collaborative seeing in
engineering work. Social Studies of Science 51:4, 564-582. [Crossref]
250. Sugato Chakravarty, Douglas J. Cumming, Samuele Murtinu, Vittoria G. Scalera, Christian Schwens.
2021. Exploring the next generation of international entrepreneurship. Journal of World Business 56:5,
101229. [Crossref]
251. Patrick Mellacher, Timon Scheuer. 2021. Wage Inequality, Labor Market Polarization and Skill-
Biased Technological Change: An Evolutionary (Agent-Based) Approach. Computational Economics
58:2, 233-278. [Crossref]
252. Peter Reuter, Bryce Pardo, Jirka Taylor. 2021. Imagining a fentanyl future: Some consequences of
synthetic opioids replacing heroin. International Journal of Drug Policy 94, 103086. [Crossref]
253. John Danaher, Sven Nyholm. 2021. Automation, work and the achievement gap. AI and Ethics 1:3,
227-237. [Crossref]
254. Colja Schneck. 2021. Trends in Wage Inequality in the Netherlands. De Economist 169:3, 253-289.
[Crossref]

--- PAGE 43 ---
255. Antonio A. Casilli. 2021. Waiting for robots: the ever-elusive myth of automation and the global
exploitation of digital labor. Sociologias 23:57, 112-133. [Crossref]
256. Matheus Viana Braz. 2021. Heteromação e microtrabalho no Brasil. Sociologias 23:57, 134-172.
[Crossref]
257. Rafael de Acypreste, Maria de Lourdes R. Mollo. 2021. A questão da maquinaria em Ricardo, Marx
e Wicksell. Nova Economia 31:2, 587-611. [Crossref]
258. Christina Pakusch, Alexander Boden, Martin Stein, Gunnar Stevens. 2021. The Automation of the
Taxi Industry – Taxi Drivers’ Expectations and Attitudes Towards the Future of their Work. Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 30:4, 539-587. [Crossref]
259. Jan Stentoft, Kent Adsbøll Wickstrøm, Kristian Philipsen, Anders Haug. 2021. Drivers and barriers for
Industry 4.0 readiness and practice: empirical evidence from small and medium-sized manufacturers.
Production Planning & Control 32:10, 811-828. [Crossref]
260. Anthony Pym, Ester Torres-Simón. 2021. Is automation changing the translation profession?.
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 2021:270, 39-57. [Crossref]
261. Antonio Caparrós Ruiz. 2021. ICTs usage and skills matching at work: some evidence from Spain.
International Journal of Manpower 42:6, 1064-1083. [Crossref]
262. Rhys Johnstone, Anthony Wilson-Prangley. 2021. The relationship between mindfulness and
individual adaptability in dynamic work contexts. South African Journal of Business Management 52:1. .
[Crossref]
263. Liya Palagashvili. 2021. Editorial. Journal of Entrepreneurship and Public Policy  10:2, 189-197.
[Crossref]
264. Yuri Lima, Julia Celia Mercedes Strauch, Maria Gilda Pimentel Esteves, Jano Moreira de Souza,
Miriam Barbuda Chaves, Daniel Takata Gomes. 2021. Exploring the future impact of automation in
Brazil. Employee Relations: The International Journal 43:5, 1052-1066. [Crossref]
265. Davide Dottori. 2021. Robots and employment: evidence from Italy. Economia Politica 38:2, 739-795.
[Crossref]
266. Antonina Pinchuk. 2021. Social and Professional Adaptation: From Conceptualization To
Measurement. Sociologicheskaja nauka i social'naja praktika 9:2, 96-114. [Crossref]
267. Annie Tubadji, Toby Denney, Don J. Webber. 2021. Cultural relativity in consumers' rates of adoption
of artificial intelligence. Economic Inquiry 59:3, 1234-1251. [Crossref]
268. Björn Döhring, Atanas Hristov, Christoph Maier, Werner Roeger, Anna Thum-Thysen. 2021.
COVID-19 acceleration in digitalisation, aggregate productivity growth and the functional income
distribution. International Economics and Economic Policy 18:3, 571-604. [Crossref]
269. Gregory Verdugo. 2021. Les robots sont-ils les ennemis de nos salaires ?. Regards croisés sur l'économie
n° 27:2, 222-230. [Crossref]
270. Haris Khan, Choudhry Tanveer Shehzad, Ferhana Ahmad. 2021. Temporal effects of financial
globalization on income inequality. International Review of Economics & Finance  74, 452-467.
[Crossref]
271. Olcay BESNİLİ MEMİŞ. 2021. İşgücü Piyasaları Bağlamında Endüstri 4.0 Kavramına İlişkin
Üniversite Öğrencilerinin Metaforik Görüşleri. Adnan Menderes Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü
Dergisi . [Crossref]
272. Rajabrata Banerjee, Robert Inklaar, Herman de Jong. Proximate Sources of Growth 356-381.
[Crossref]
273. . Global Productivity: Trends, Drivers, and Policies 84, . [Crossref]

--- PAGE 44 ---
274. Alistair Dieppe, Neville Francis, Gene Kindberg-Hanlon. Productivity: Technology, Demand, and
Employment Trade-Offs 311-356. [Crossref]
275. Yuri Lima, Carlos Eduardo Barbosa, Herbert Salazar dos Santos, Jano Moreira de Souza. 2021.
Understanding Technological Unemployment: A Review of Causes, Consequences, and Solutions.
Societies 11:2, 50. [Crossref]
276. Urška Kosem, Mirko Markič, Annmarie Gorenc Zoran. 2021. Automation of Work Processes and
Night Work. Data 6:6, 56. [Crossref]
277. Richard Watermeyer, Zan Chen, Bryan John Ang. 2021. ‘Education without limits’: The digital
resettlement of post-secondary education and training in Singapore in the COVID-19 era. Journal
of Education Policy 9, 1-22. [Crossref]
278. Žilvinas Martinaitis, Aleksandr Christenko, Jonas Antanavičius. 2021. Upskilling, Deskilling or
Polarisation? Evidence on Change in Skills in Europe. Work, Employment and Society 35:3, 451-469.
[Crossref]
279. Shampa Paul, Kaushalesh Lal. 2021. Technology Intensity and Employment in the Indian Economy.
Arthaniti: Journal of Economic Theory and Practice 20:1, 34-52. [Crossref]
280. Antonio Estache, Renaud Foucart. 2021. On the political economy of industrial, labor and social
reforms as complements. European Economic Review 19, 103789. [Crossref]
281. Denton R. Vaughan, Barbara A. Haley, Aref N. Dajani. 2021. Ten years later: Self‐sufficiency of
welfare mothers before the Great Recession. Poverty & Public Policy 13:2, 184-223. [Crossref]
282. Chia-Hui Lu. 2021. The impact of artificial intelligence on economic growth and welfare. Journal of
Macroeconomics 108, 103342. [Crossref]
283. Seounmi Youn, S. Venus Jin. 2021. “In A.I. we trust?” The effects of parasocial interaction and
technopian versus luddite ideological views on chatbot-based customer relationship management in
the emerging “feeling economy”. Computers in Human Behavior 119, 106721. [Crossref]
284. Zhan Su, Guillaume Togay, Anne-Marie Côté. 2021. Artificial intelligence: a destructive and yet
creative force in the skilled labour market. Human Resource Development International 24:3, 341-352.
[Crossref]
285. Caroline Lloyd, Jonathan Payne. 2021. Food for thought: Robots, jobs and skills in food and drink
processing in Norway and the UK. New Technology, Work and Employment 22. . [Crossref]
286. Amaya Erro-Garcés. 2021. Industry 4.0: defining the research agenda. Benchmarking: An International
Journal 28:5, 1858-1882. [Crossref]
287. Anita Pollak, Mateusz Paliga, Barbara Kozusznik. The Impact of New Technologies on Work Design
– Case Study of the Industrial Robot Controllers from One Organization 156-160. [Crossref]
288. Ya-Wen Lei. 2021. Upgrading China through Automation: Manufacturers, Workers and the Techno-
Developmental State. Work, Employment and Society 49, 095001702199919. [Crossref]
289. Seamus McGuinness, Konstantinos Pouliakas, Paul Redmond. 2021. Skills-displacing technological
change and its impact on jobs: challenging technological alarmism?. Economics of Innovation and New
Technology 15, 1-23. [Crossref]
290. Louis Lippens, Eline Moens, Philippe Sterkens, Johannes Weytjens, Stijn Baert. 2021. How do
employees think the COVID-19 crisis will affect their careers?. PLOS ONE  16:5, e0246899.
[Crossref]
291. Marie Benedetto-Meyer, Anca Boboc. Bibliographie 213-234. [Crossref]
292. Felix Lukowski, Myriam Baum, Sabine Mohr. 2021. Technology, tasks and training – evidence on
the provision of employer-provided training in times of technological change in Germany. Studies in
Continuing Education 43:2, 174-195. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 45 ---
293. Michael Samers. 2021. Futurological fodder: on communicating the relationship between artificial
intelligence, robotics, and employment. Space and Polity 25:2, 237-256. [Crossref]
294. Daniel E. Koditschek. 2021. What Is Robotics? Why Do We Need It and How Can We Get It?.
Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems 4:1, 1-33. [Crossref]
295. Peng Ge, Wenkai Sun, Zhong Zhao. 2021. Employment structure in China from 1990 to 2015. Journal
of Economic Behavior & Organization 185, 168-190. [Crossref]
296. Irene Arcelay, Aitor Goti, Aitor Oyarbide-Zubillaga, Tugce Akyazi, Elisabete Alberdi, Pablo Garcia-
Bringas. 2021. Definition of the Future Skills Needs of Job Profiles in the Renewable Energy Sector.
Energies 14:9, 2609. [Crossref]
297. Bryan Zheng Zhang, Arvind Ashta, Mary Emma Barton. 2021. Do FinTech and financial incumbents
have different experiences and perspectives on the adoption of artificial intelligence?. Strategic Change
30:3, 223-234. [Crossref]
298. Arvind Ashta, Heinz Herrmann. 2021. Artificial intelligence and fintech: An overview of opportunities
and risks for banking, investments, and microfinance. Strategic Change 30:3, 211-222. [Crossref]
299. Mike Tissenbaum, David Weintrop, Nathan Holbert, Tamara Clegg. 2021. The case for alternative
endpoints in computing education. British Journal of Educational Technology  52:3, 1164-1177.
[Crossref]
300. Greg Schrock, Nichola Lowe. 2021. Inclusive innovation editorial: The promise of inclusive
innovation. Local Economy: The Journal of the Local Economy Policy Unit 36:3, 181-186. [Crossref]
301. Alessandro Delfanti, Bronwyn Frey. 2021. Humanly Extended Automation or the Future of Work
Seen through Amazon Patents. Science, Technology, & Human Values 46:3, 655-682. [Crossref]
302. Piyush Pradhananga, Mohamed ElZomor, Gabriella Santi Kasabdji. 2021. Identifying the Challenges
to Adopting Robotics in the US Construction Industry. Journal of Construction Engineering and
Management 147:5. . [Crossref]
303. Renjini M. Joseph, Adele Thomas, Penny Abbott. 2021. Information technology competencies for
entry-level human resource strategic partners. SA Journal of Human Resource Management  19. .
[Crossref]
304. Ed Dandalt. 2021. The cyber-work performance of managers in education. Journal of Management
Development 40:3, 151-167. [Crossref]
305. Xose Picatoste, Mirela Ionela Aceleanu, Andreea Claudia Șerban. 2021. JOB QUALITY AND
WELL-BEING IN OECD COUNTRIES. Technological and Economic Development of Economy 27:3,
681-703. [Crossref]
306. Kateryna Schroeder, Julian Lampietti, Ghada Elabed. What's Cooking: Digital Transformation of
the Agrifood System . [Crossref]
307. Armanda Cetrulo, Dario Guarascio, Maria Enrica Virgillito. 2021. Anatomy of the Italian occupational
structure: concentrated power and distributed knowledge. Industrial and Corporate Change  29:6,
1345-1379. [Crossref]
308. VILLE-VEIKKO PULKKA, MISKA SIMANAINEN. 2021. Socio-Economic Performance of
European Welfare States in Technology-Induced Employment Scenarios. Journal of Social Policy 52,
1-25. [Crossref]
309. Jieun Lee, Yusuke Yamani, Shelby K. Long, James Unverricht, Makoto Itoh. 2021. Revisiting Human-
Machine Trust: A Replication Study of Muir & Moray (1996) Using a Simulated Pasteurizer Plant
Task. Ergonomics 1-43. [Crossref]
310. Lizzie Richardson. 2021. Coordinating office space: Digital technologies and the platformization of
work. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 39:2, 347-365. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 46 ---
311. Kristin Frady. 2021. Media Analysis of Middle Skill Learning Opportunities Shaped by COVID‐19.
New Horizons in Adult Education and Human Resource Development 33:2, 16-33. [Crossref]
312. Yogesh K. Dwivedi, Laurie Hughes, Elvira Ismagilova, Gert Aarts, Crispin Coombs, Tom Crick,
Yanqing Duan, Rohita Dwivedi, John Edwards, Aled Eirug, Vassilis Galanos, P . Vigneswara Ilavarasan,
Marijn Janssen, Paul Jones, Arpan Kumar Kar, Hatice Kizgin, Bianca Kronemann, Banita Lal, Biagio
Lucini, Rony Medaglia, Kenneth Le Meunier-FitzHugh, Leslie Caroline Le Meunier-FitzHugh,
Santosh Misra, Emmanuel Mogaji, Sujeet Kumar Sharma, Jang Bahadur Singh, Vishnupriya
Raghavan, Ramakrishnan Raman, Nripendra P . Rana, Spyridon Samothrakis, Jak Spencer, Kuttimani
Tamilmani, Annie Tubadji, Paul Walton, Michael D. Williams. 2021. Artificial Intelligence (AI):
Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging challenges, opportunities, and agenda for research, practice
and policy. International Journal of Information Management 57, 101994. [Crossref]
313. Dan Zhang, L.G. Pee, Lili Cui. 2021. Artificial intelligence in E-commerce fulfillment: A case
study of resource orchestration at Alibaba’s Smart Warehouse. International Journal of Information
Management 57, 102304. [Crossref]
314. Tobias Bock, Stephan Höfer. 2021. Autonomisierung von Shopfloor Management. Zeitschrift für
wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb 116:3, 139-143. [Crossref]
315. Daniel Garrote Sanchez, Nicolas Gomez Parra, Caglar Ozden, Bob Rijkers, Mariana Viollaz, Hernan
Winkler. 2021. Who on Earth Can Work from Home?. The World Bank Research Observer  107. .
[Crossref]
316. Imran Arif. 2021. Productive knowledge, economic sophistication, and labor share. World Development
139, 105303. [Crossref]
317. Cyn-Young Park, Kwanho Shin, Aiko Kikkawa. 2021. Aging, automation, and productivity in Korea.
Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 59, 101109. [Crossref]
318. Gilbert Cette, Aurélien Devillard, Vincenzo Spiezia. 2021. The contribution of robots to productivity
growth in 30 OECD countries over 1975–2019. Economics Letters 200, 109762. [Crossref]
319. Victor L. Shabanov, Marianna Ya Vasilchenko, Elena A. Derunova, Andrey P . Potapov. 2021.
Formation of an Export-Oriented Agricultural Economy and Regional Open Innovations. Journal of
Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 7:1, 32. [Crossref]
320. Omar Flor, Hector Tillerias, Belen Mejia, Cleopatra Proano, Michelle Rodriguez, Franyelit Suarez,
Christian Chimbo. Impact of Industrial Automation in Employability 157-162. [Crossref]
321. Bin Ni, Ayako Obashi. 2021. Robotics technology and firm-level employment adjustment in Japan.
Japan and the World Economy 57, 101054. [Crossref]
322. Pooyan Khashabi, Matthias Heinz, Nick Zubanov, Tobias Kretschmer, Guido Friebel. 2021. Market
Competition and the Effectiveness of Performance Pay. Organization Science 32:2, 334-351. [Crossref]
323. Junichi Mori. 2021. Revisiting employer perceptions of skill mismatch: the case of the machine
manufacturing industry in Vietnam. Journal of Education and Work 34:2, 199-216. [Crossref]
324. Kirsten Thommes, Janny Klabuhn. 2021. Age and tenure diversity on the work floor. Evidence-based
HRM: a Global Forum for Empirical Scholarship 9:1, 95-117. [Crossref]
325. Giuseppe Lamberti, Jordi Lopez-Sintas, Jakkapong Sukphan. 2021. The social process of internet
appropriation: Living in a digitally advanced country benefits less well-educated Europeans.
Telecommunications Policy 45:1, 102055. [Crossref]
326. Elisa K. Bone, Pauline M. Ross. 2021. Rational curriculum processes: revising learning outcomes is
essential yet insufficient for a twenty-first century science curriculum. Studies in Higher Education
46:2, 394-405. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 47 ---
327. Javier Bilbao-Ubillos, Vicente Camino-Beldarrain, Gurutze Intxaurburu-Clemente. 2021. Industry
4.0, proximity constraints and new challenges for industrial policy. European Planning Studies 29:2,
329-345. [Crossref]
328. Yuan Xia. 2021. The Influence of Artificial Intelligence on the Diversity of Plant Design in Landscape
Design. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1744:2, 022104. [Crossref]
329. Gene Kindberg-Hanlon. The Technology-Employment Trade-Off: Automation, Industry, and
Income Effects 2, . [Crossref]
330. Amira Mohamed Emara. 2021. The impact of technological progress on employment in Egypt.
International Journal of Social Economics 48:2, 260-278. [Crossref]
331. Ajax Persaud. 2021. Key competencies for big data analytics professions: a multimethod study.
Information Technology & People 34:1, 178-203. [Crossref]
332. Arvind Ashta. 2021. In the wake of the COVID crisis, Work-sharing from Different Angles:
Employment, Equality, Ecology and Elation. Marché et organisations n° 40:1, 159-186. [Crossref]
333. Antonis Adam, Antonios Garas, Marina-Selini Katsaiti, Athanasios Lapatinas. 2021. Economic
complexity and jobs: an empirical analysis. Economics of Innovation and New Technology  7, 1-28.
[Crossref]
334. Cameron Piercy, Angela Gist-Mackey. 2021. Automation Anxieties: Perceptions About Technological
Automation and the Future of Pharmacy Work. Human-Machine Communication  2, 191-208.
[Crossref]
335. Peter Haiss, Bernhard Mahlberg, Daniel Michlits. 2021. Industry 4.0–the future of Austrian jobs.
Empirica 128. . [Crossref]
336. Wim Naudé. 2021. Artificial intelligence: neither Utopian nor apocalyptic impacts soon. Economics of
Innovation and New Technology 30:1, 1-23. [Crossref]
337. Todd J. B. Blayone, Roland VanOostveen. 2021. Prepared for work in Industry 4.0? Modelling the
target activity system and five dimensions of worker readiness. International Journal of Computer
Integrated Manufacturing 34:1, 1-19. [Crossref]
338. Emma C. Gardner, John R. Bryson. 2021. The dark side of the industrialisation of accountancy:
innovation, commoditization, colonization and competitiveness. Industry and Innovation 28:1, 42-57.
[Crossref]
339. Georg Spöttl, Lars Windelband. 2021. The 4 th industrial revolution – its impact on vocational skills.
Journal of Education and Work 34:1, 29-52. [Crossref]
340. John Armour, Richard Parnham, Mari Sako. 2021. Unlocking the potential of AI for English law.
International Journal of the Legal Profession 28:1, 65-83. [Crossref]
341. Diane Charlton, Genti Kostandini. 2021. Can Technology Compensate for a Labor Shortage? Effects
of 287(g) Immigration Policies on the U.S. Dairy Industry. American Journal of Agricultural Economics
103:1, 70-89. [Crossref]
342. Volha PASHKEVICH, Darek M. HAFTOR, Natallia PASHKEVICH. 2021. The information sector
in Denmark and Sweden: Value, employment, wages. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 162,
120347. [Crossref]
343. Olga Lucía Lopera Lopera, Juan Velez-Ocampo. Automation Adoption in the Textile Industry of an
Emerging Economy 55-73. [Crossref]
344. Chiara Cimini, Alexandra Lagorio, Fabiana Pirola, Roberto Pinto. 2021. How human factors affect
operators' task evolution in Logistics 4.0. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service
Industries 31:1, 98-117. [Crossref]
345. Matthias Klumpp, Caroline Ruiner. Digital Supply Chains and the Human Factor—A Structured
Synopsis 1-14. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 48 ---
346. Jae Yup Jung. The Career Decisions of Gifted Students: An Asian-Pacific Perspective 1367-1384.
[Crossref]
347. Alberto A. P . Cattaneo, Luca Bonini, Martina Rauseo. The “Digital Facilitator”: An Extended Profile
to Manage the Digital Transformation of Swiss Vocational Schools 169-187. [Crossref]
348. Klaus Kornwachs, Nico Stehr. 2021. Die Frage der Qualifizierung in einer digitalisierten Gesellschaft.
Wirtschaftsdienst 101:1, 33-39. [Crossref]
349. Fernando Celso Garcia da Silveira, Rodrigo da Silva Monteiro, Ettore de Carvalho Oriol, Marcus
Brauer, Alberto Luiz Albertin. Comparison Between Traditional Learning and Learning Mediated
by Information Technology in the Corporate Environment 146-156. [Crossref]
350. Mårten Blix, Emil Bustos. Money for Nothin’: Digitalization and Fluid Tax Bases 185-209. [Crossref]
351. Fredrik Heyman, Pehr-Johan Norbäck, Lars Persson. Digitalisation, Productivity and Jobs: A
European Perspective 135-159. [Crossref]
352. Mihai Mutascu. 2021. Artificial intelligence and unemployment: New insights. Economic Analysis and
Policy 108. . [Crossref]
353. Elena Gorbashko, Irina Golovtsova, Dmitry Desyatko, Viktorya Rapgof. Breakthrough Technologies
and Labor Market Transformation: How It Works and Some Evidence from the Economies of
Developed Countries 67-84. [Crossref]
354. R. Maria del Rio-Chanona, Penny Mealy, Mariano Beguerisse-Díaz, François Lafond, J. Doyne
Farmer. 2021. Occupational mobility and automation: a data-driven network model. Journal of The
Royal Society Interface 18:174, 20200898. [Crossref]
355. Daniel Connolly. Postmodern Risks: The Fourth Industrial Revolution in East Asia 141-166.
[Crossref]
356. Attila Marton, Hamid Ekbia. Platforms and the New Division of Labor Between Humans and
Machines 23-46. [Crossref]
357. Ralph P . Hall, Shyam Ranganathan. Completing the Cycle: An Inclusive Capitalism Approach
Linking Sustainable Consumption and Production 65-84. [Crossref]
358. Iulia Mihalache. Human and Non-Human Crossover: Translators Partnering with Digital Tools
19-43. [Crossref]
359. Mikhail Lysyakov, Siva Viswanathan. 2021. Threatened by AI: Analyzing Users’ Responses to the
Introduction of AI in a Crowd-sourcing Platform. SSRN Electronic Journal 108. . [Crossref]
360. Ya-Wen Lei. 2021. Upgrading China Through Automation: Manufacturers, Workers and the
Techno-Developmental State. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
361. Helena Fidlerová, Martina Porubčinová, Martin Fero, Ivana Novotná. Identification of Challenges and
Opportunities for Work 4.0 Competences Developing in Slovakia 1089-1111. [Crossref]
362. Edgar Oliver Cardoso Espinosa. The Development of the Management Competences at the
Postgraduate Level in the Context of the Fourth Industrial Revolution 1686-1698. [Crossref]
363. Fabian Stephany. 2021. One size does not fit all: Constructing complementary digital reskilling
strategies using online labour market data. Big Data & Society 8:1, 205395172110031. [Crossref]
364. Michael Thom. Taxing Twenty-First Century Sins 153-176. [Crossref]
365. Olga V. Budzinskaya. Competencies for a Digital Economy 217-223. [Crossref]
366. Roman R. KHUZIAKHMETOV, Vladimir A. DAVYDENKO. 2021. NON-COGNITIVE
COMPONENTS CONCEPT OF HUMAN CAPITAL IN MODERN ECONOMIC AND
SOCIOLOGICAL LITERATURE. Tyumen State University Herald. Social, Economic, and Law
Research 7:2, 39-64. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 49 ---
367. Yi Liu, Xinyi Zhao, Bowen Lou, Xinxin Li. 2021. The Coin of AI Has Two Sides: Matching
Enhancement and Information Revelation Effects of AI on Gig-Economy Platforms. SSRN Electronic
Journal 29. . [Crossref]
368. Diego Aboal, Andrés López, Roxana Maurizio, Paz Queraltó. 2021. Automatización y empleo en
Uruguay. Revista Desarrollo y Sociedad :87, 33-72. [Crossref]
369. Prithwiraj Choudhury, Ryan T. Allen, Michael G. Endres. 2021. Machine learning for pattern
discovery in management research. Strategic Management Journal 42:1, 30-57. [Crossref]
370. Themistoklis Tzimas. The Expectations and Risks from AI 9-32. [Crossref]
371. Olga V. Budzinskaya. Competences for Digital Economy 216-221. [Crossref]
372. Olga V. Budzinskaya. Features of Labor Activity in the “Industry 4.0” Production Sector 212-215.
[Crossref]
373. Shah Md Azimul Ehsan. Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Labor Market in Bangladesh 1-9.
[Crossref]
374. Anabela Mesquita, Luciana Oliveira, Arminda Sa Sequeira. Did AI Kill My Job? 124-146. [Crossref]
375. Elias Moser. Machines and Technological Unemployment 205-225. [Crossref]
376. Josipa Višić. Robots and Economics 173-187. [Crossref]
377. Nicole Palan, Andreas Schober. The Need for (Increased) ICT Skills in the Era of Digitalization
34-55. [Crossref]
378. Phillip Brown, Sahara Sadik, Jing Xu. 2021. Higher education, graduate talent and the prospects
for social mobility in China's innovation nation. International Journal of Educational Research  109,
101841. [Crossref]
379. Emiliana Armano, Salvatore Cominu, Kristin Carls, Marco Briziarelli. 2021. Connectivity and
human capacity in digital transformation: the exploratory hypotheses of hyper industrial. STUDI
ORGANIZZATIVI :1, 146-169. [Crossref]
380. Alexander Stohr, Jamie O’Rourke. Through the Cognitive Functions Lens - A Socio-technical
Analysis of Predictive Maintenance 182-197. [Crossref]
381. Cecilia Rikap, Bengt-Åke Lundvall. Tech Giants and Artificial Intelligence as a Technological
Innovation System 65-90. [Crossref]
382. Saija Mauno, Ulla Kinnunen. The Importance of Recovery from Work in Intensified Working Life
59-77. [Crossref]
383. Anna Palmqvist, Emelie Vikingsson, Dan Li, Åsa Fast-Berglund, Niklas Lund. 2021. Concepts for
digitalisation of assembly instructions for short takt times. Procedia CIRP 97, 154-159. [Crossref]
384. Raja Bentaouet Kattan, Kevin Macdonald, Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2020. The Role of Education in
Mitigating Automation’s Effect on Wage Inequality. LABOUR 88. . [Crossref]
385. Anqi Zheng. Analysis on the Social and Economic Impacts of Internet Platforms : (Based on Survey
Data from WeChat (China) during 2019-2020) 1-6. [Crossref]
386. Alcidio Silva Figueiredo, Luisa Helena Pinto. 2020. Robotizing shared service centres: key challenges
and outcomes. Journal of Service Theory and Practice 31:1, 157-178. [Crossref]
387. Sara L. Tamers, Jessica Streit, Rene Pana‐Cryan, Tapas Ray, Laura Syron, Michael A. Flynn, Dawn
Castillo, Gary Roth, Charles Geraci, Rebecca Guerin, Paul Schulte, Scott Henn, Chia‐Chia Chang,
Sarah Felknor, John Howard. 2020. Envisioning the future of work to safeguard the safety, health,
and well‐being of the workforce: A perspective from the CDC's National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 63:12, 1065-1084. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 50 ---
388. Seetha Menon, Andrea Salvatori, Wouter Zwysen. 2020. The Effect of Computer Use on Work
Discretion and Work Intensity: Evidence from Europe. British Journal of Industrial Relations  58:4,
1004-1038. [Crossref]
389. Joni M. Lakin, Jonathan Wai. 2020. Spatially gifted, academically inconvenienced: Spatially talented
students experience less academic engagement and more behavioural issues than other talented
students. British Journal of Educational Psychology 90:4, 1015-1038. [Crossref]
390. Sergey Barykin, Olga Kalinina, Igor Aleksandrov, Evgenii Konnikov, Vladimir Yadikin, Mikhail
Draganov. 2020. Personnel Management Digital Model Based on the Social Profiles’ Analysis. Journal
of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 6:4, 152. [Crossref]
391. Sean Kruger, Adriana Aletta Steyn. 2020. Enhancing technology transfer through entrepreneurial
development: practices from innovation spaces. The Journal of Technology Transfer 45:6, 1655-1689.
[Crossref]
392. Monica Santana, Manuel J. Cobo. 2020. What is the future of work? A science mapping analysis.
European Management Journal 38:6, 846-862. [Crossref]
393. David Brougham, Jarrod Haar. 2020. Technological disruption and employment: The influence on
job insecurity and turnover intentions: A multi-country study. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change 161, 120276. [Crossref]
394. Derek N.J. Lingmont, Andreas Alexiou. 2020. The contingent effect of job automating technology
awareness on perceived job insecurity: Exploring the moderating role of organizational culture.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 161, 120302. [Crossref]
395. Lukas Haefner, Rolf Sternberg. 2020. Spatial implications of digitization: State of the field and
research agenda. Geography Compass 14:12. . [Crossref]
396. Ankur Jain, Sushant Ranjan. 2020. Implications of emerging technologies on the future of work.
IIMB Management Review 32:4, 448-454. [Crossref]
397. Crispin Coombs, Donald Hislop, Stanimira K. Taneva, Sarah Barnard. 2020. The strategic impacts
of Intelligent Automation for knowledge and service work: An interdisciplinary review. The Journal
of Strategic Information Systems 29:4, 101600. [Crossref]
398. Irene Brunetti, Valerio Intraligi, Andrea Ricci, Valeria Cirillo. 2020. Low‐skill jobs and routine
tasks specialization: New insights from Italian provinces. Papers in Regional Science 99:6, 1561-1581.
[Crossref]
399. Gary R Lea. 2020. Constructivism and its risks in artificial intelligence. Prometheus 36:4. . [Crossref]
400. Huijuan Wang, Lin Ding, Rong Guan, Yan Xia. 2020. Effects of advancing internet technology on
Chinese employment: a spatial study of inter-industry spillovers. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change 161, 120259. [Crossref]
401. Francis de Véricourt, Georgia Perakis. 2020. Frontiers in Service Science: The Management of Data
Analytics Services: New Challenges and Future Directions. Service Science 12:4, 121-129. [Crossref]
402. Vikneswary Batumalai, Michael G. Jameson, Odette King, Rhiannon Walker, Chelsea Slater, Kylie
Dundas, Glen Dinsdale, Andrew Wallis, Cesar Ochoa, Rohan Gray, Phil Vial, Shalini K. Vinod.
2020. Cautiously optimistic: A survey of radiation oncology professionals’ perceptions of automation
in radiotherapy planning. Technical Innovations & Patient Support in Radiation Oncology  16, 58-64.
[Crossref]
403. Henrik Schwabe, Fulvio Castellacci. 2020. Automation, workers’ skills and job satisfaction. PLOS
ONE 15:11, e0242929. [Crossref]
404. Belma Kencebay. Robotization and Welfare Trends in Future . [Crossref]
405. Phillip Brown. 2020. Some observations on the race to higher education, digital technologies and the
future of work. Journal of Education and Work 33:7-8, 491-499. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 51 ---
406. Nicolas Bueno. 2020. Freedom at work, freedom through work, freedom from work: Rethinking
fundamental labour rights. International Labour Review 35. . [Crossref]
407. Ian Holland, Jamie A. Davies. 2020. Automation in the Life Science Research Laboratory. Frontiers
in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 8. . [Crossref]
408. Dean Stroud, Martin Weinel. 2020. A safer, faster, leaner workplace? Technical‐maintenance worker
perspectives on digital drone technology ‘effects’ in the European steel industry. New Technology,
Work and Employment 35:3, 297-313. [Crossref]
409. Ramesh Ghimire, Jim Skinner, Mike Carnathan. 2020. Who perceived automation as a threat to their
jobs in metro Atlanta: Results from the 2019 Metro Atlanta Speaks survey. Technology in Society 63,
101368. [Crossref]
410. Stella Sophie Zilian, Laura Samantha Zilian. 2020. Digital inequality in Austria: Empirical evidence
from the survey of the OECD “Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies”.
Technology in Society 63, 101397. [Crossref]
411. Nicolás De la Peña, Oscar Granados. 2020. Cuarta revolución industrial: implicaciones en la seguridad
internacional. OASIS :33, 49-73. [Crossref]
412. Paulina Pietrzak, Michał Kornacki. Technological Evolution in Translation 46-65. [Crossref]
413. Daniel Schiff, Aladdin Ayesh, Laura Musikanski, John C. Havens. IEEE 7010: A New Standard for
Assessing the Well-being Implications of Artificial Intelligence 2746-2753. [Crossref]
414. Paul A Schulte, Jessica M K Streit, Fatima Sheriff, George Delclos, Sarah A Felknor, Sara L Tamers,
Sherry Fendinger, James Grosch, Robert Sala. 2020. Potential Scenarios and Hazards in the Work of
the Future: A Systematic Review of the Peer-Reviewed and Gray Literatures. Annals of Work Exposures
and Health 64:8, 786-816. [Crossref]
415. Lilla Vicsek. 2020. Artificial intelligence and the future of work – lessons from the sociology of
expectations. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy  ahead-of-print:ahead-of-print. .
[Crossref]
416. Julie MacLeavy. 2020. Care work, gender inequality and technological advancement in the age of
COVID‐19. Gender, Work & Organization 35. . [Crossref]
417. Santiago Melián-González, Jacques Bulchand-Gidumal. 2020. Employment in tourism: The jaws of
the snake in the hotel industry. Tourism Management 80, 104123. [Crossref]
418. Jens Prüfer, Patricia Prüfer. 2020. Data science for entrepreneurship research: studying demand
dynamics for entrepreneurial skills in the Netherlands. Small Business Economics  55:3, 651-672.
[Crossref]
419. Jianqiang Li, Yaowen Shan, Gary Tian, Xiangchao Hao. 2020. Labor cost, government intervention,
and corporate innovation: Evidence from China. Journal of Corporate Finance 64, 101668. [Crossref]
420. Gaaitzen J. de Vries, Elisabetta Gentile, Sébastien Miroudot, Konstantin M. Wacker. 2020. The rise
of robots and the fall of routine jobs. Labour Economics 66, 101885. [Crossref]
421. Chiara Cavaglia, Ben Etheridge. 2020. Job polarization and the declining quality of knowledge
workers: Evidence from the UK and Germany. Labour Economics 66, 101884. [Crossref]
422. Linda Glawe, Helmut Wagner. 2020. The Middle-Income Trap 2.0: The Increasing Role of Human
Capital in the Age of Automation and Implications for Developing Asia. Asian Economic Papers 19:3,
40-58. [Crossref]
423. Jannes ten Berge, Zoltán Lippényi, Tanja van der Lippe, Maarten Goos. 2020. Technology
implementation within enterprises and job ending among employees. A study of the role of educational
attainment, organizational tenure, age and unionization. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility
69, 100548. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 52 ---
424. Jin Hwa Jung, Dong-Geon Lim. 2020. Industrial robots, employment growth, and labor cost: A
simultaneous equation analysis. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 159, 120202. [Crossref]
425. Christian Parschau, Jostein Hauge. 2020. Is automation stealing manufacturing jobs? Evidence from
South Africa’s apparel industry. Geoforum 115, 120-131. [Crossref]
426. Simon Eisele, Martin R. Schneider. 2020. What Do Unions Do to Work Design? Computer Use,
Union Presence, and Tayloristic Jobs in Britain. Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society
59:4, 604-626. [Crossref]
427. Jacob Rubæk Holm, Edward Lorenz, Peter Nielsen. 2020. Work organization and job polarization.
Research Policy 49:8, 104015. [Crossref]
428. Mercedes Delgado, Karen G. Mills. 2020. The supply chain economy: A new industry categorization
for understanding innovation in services. Research Policy 49:8, 104039. [Crossref]
429. Anna Wallin, Laura Pylväs, Petri Nokelainen. 2020. Government Workers’ Stories about Professional
Development in a Digitalized Working Life. Vocations and Learning 13:3, 439-458. [Crossref]
430. Jacopo Zotti, Rosita Pretaroli, Francesca Severini, Claudio Socci, Giancarlo Infantino. 2020.
Employment incentives and the disaggregated impact on the economy. The Italian case. Economia
Politica 37:3, 993-1032. [Crossref]
431. John Torpey. 2020. A sociological agenda for the tech age. Theory and Society  49:5-6, 749-769.
[Crossref]
432. Nicola Gagliardi, Benoît Mahy, François Rycx. 2020. Trade, GVCs, and wage inequality: Theoretical
and empirical insights. Reflets et perspectives de la vie économique L VIII:2, 115-134. [Crossref]
433. Rahild Neuburger, Marina Fiedler. 2020. Zukunft der Arbeit – Implikationen und Herausforderungen
durch autonome Informationssysteme. Schmalenbachs Zeitschrift für betriebswirtschaftliche Forschung
29. . [Crossref]
434. O. V. Sushkova. 2020. PECULIARITIES OF USING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
TECHNOLOGY BY SELF-REGULATED ORGANIZATIONS IN THE ACTIVITIES OF
ENTREPRENEURIAL LAWS. Courier of Kutafin Moscow State Law University (MSAL)) :7, 68-75.
[Crossref]
435. Mercedes Delgado. 2020. The co-location of innovation and production in clusters. Industry and
Innovation 27:8, 842-870. [Crossref]
436. W. David Holford. 2020. The algorithmic workplace and its enactive effect on the future of
professions. Futures 122, 102609. [Crossref]
437. Josep Ubalde, Amado Alarcón. 2020. Are all automation-resistant skills rewarded? Linguistic skills
in the US labour market. The Economic and Labour Relations Review 31:3, 403-424. [Crossref]
438. KUO-CHENG KUO, WEN-MIN LU, GRACE TZU-YI CHANG. 2020. INTELLECTUAL
CAPITAL AND PERFORMANCE IN THE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY. The Singapore
Economic Review 65:05, 1323-1348. [Crossref]
439. Jim Li, Max Pang, Jennifer Smith, Colleen Pawliuk, Ian Pike. 2020. In Search of Concrete Outcomes
—A Systematic Review on the Effectiveness of Educational Interventions on Reducing Acute
Occupational Injuries. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17:18, 6874.
[Crossref]
440. Pietro Maffettone, Chiara Oldani. 2020. COVID‐19: A Make or Break Moment for Global Policy
Making. Global Policy 11:4, 501-507. [Crossref]
441. Beth A. Bechky. 2020. Evaluative Spillovers from Technological Change: The Effects of “DNA
Envy” on Occupational Practices in Forensic Science. Administrative Science Quarterly 65:3, 606-643.
[Crossref]

--- PAGE 53 ---
442. Martin Ehlert. 2020. No Future, No Training? Explaining Cross-national Variation in the Effect
of Job Tasks On Training Participation. KZfSS Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie
72:S1, 483-510. [Crossref]
443. Anke Siefer. 2020. Berichterstattung zu Sicherheit und Gesundheit bei der Arbeit.
Bundesgesundheitsblatt - Gesundheitsforschung - Gesundheitsschutz 63:9, 1076-1083. [Crossref]
444. Andreas Haupt, Christian Ebner. 2020. Occupations and Inequality: Theoretical Perspectives and
Mechanisms. KZfSS Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 72:S1, 19-40. [Crossref]
445. W. David Holford. 2020. The repression of mètis within digital organizations. Prometheus 36:3. .
[Crossref]
446. Aksel Braanen Sterri. 2020. Heller velferdsstat enn borgerlønn. Norsk filosofisk tidsskrift  55:2-03,
126-140. [Crossref]
447. Kristoffer Chelsom Vogt, Thomas Lorentzen, Hans-Tore Hansen. 2020. Are low-skilled young
people increasingly useless, and are men the losers among them?. Journal of Education and Work
33:5-6, 392-409. [Crossref]
448. Carolina Rodriguez-Bustelo, Joan Manuel Batista-Foguet, Ricard Serlavós. 2020. Debating the Future
of Work: The Perception and Reaction of the Spanish Workforce to Digitization and Automation
Technologies. Frontiers in Psychology 11. . [Crossref]
449. Daniel Schiff. 2020. Out of the laboratory and into the classroom: the future of artificial intelligence
in education. AI & SOCIETY 7. . [Crossref]
450. Prithwiraj Choudhury, Evan Starr, Rajshree Agarwal. 2020. Machine learning and human capital
complementarities: Experimental evidence on bias mitigation. Strategic Management Journal  41:8,
1381-1411. [Crossref]
451. Mark W Wiggins, Jaime Auton, Piers Bayl-Smith, Ann Carrigan. 2020. Optimising the future of
technology in organisations: A human factors perspective. Australian Journal of Management  45:3,
449-467. [Crossref]
452. Stepan Zemtsov. 2020. New technologies, potential unemployment and ‘nescience economy’ during
and after the 2020 economic crisis. Regional Science Policy & Practice 12:4, 723-743. [Crossref]
453. Noemi Oggero, Maria Cristina Rossi, Elisa Ughetto. 2020. Entrepreneurial spirits in women and men.
The role of financial literacy and digital skills. Small Business Economics 55:2, 313-327. [Crossref]
454. Lino Codara, Francesca Sgobbi. 2020. Tecnologia, organizzazione e lavoro nella quarta rivoluzione
industriale: due studi di caso comparati nel settore manifatturiero. SOCIOLOGIA DEL LAVORO
:157, 225-239. [Crossref]
455. Scott E. Sampson. 2020. A Strategic Framework for Task Automation in Professional Services. Journal
of Service Research 4, 109467052094040. [Crossref]
456. Önder Nomaler, Bart Verspagen. 2020. Perpetual growth, the labor share, and robots. Economics of
Innovation and New Technology 29:5, 540-558. [Crossref]
457. Francesco Grigoli, Zsoka Koczan, Petia Topalova. 2020. Automation and labor force participation in
advanced economies: Macro and micro evidence. European Economic Review 126, 103443. [Crossref]
458. Sergio Santos, Maritsa Kissamitaki, Matteo Chiesa. 2020. Should humans work?. Telecommunications
Policy 44:6, 101910. [Crossref]
459. Csongor Nagy, Ernő Molnár, Éva Kiss. 2020. Industry 4.0 in a dualistic manufacturing sector
– qualitative experiences from enterprises and their environment, Eastern Hungary. Hungarian
Geographical Bulletin 69:2, 157-174. [Crossref]
460. Jon Bokrantz, Anders Skoogh, Cecilia Berlin, Thorsten Wuest, Johan Stahre. 2020. Smart
Maintenance: a research agenda for industrial maintenance management. International Journal of
Production Economics 224, 107547. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 54 ---
461. Anton Esser, Christa Sys, Thierry Vanelslander, Ann Verhetsel. 2020. The labour market for the port
of the future. A case study for the port of Antwerp. Case Studies on Transport Policy  8:2, 349-360.
[Crossref]
462. Manuel Au-Yong-Oliveira, Carlos Lopes, Francisco Soares, Goncalo Pinheiro, Pedro Guimaraes.
What can we expect from the future? The impact of Artificial Intelligence on Society 1-6. [Crossref]
463. Tor Grønsund, Margunn Aanestad. 2020. Augmenting the algorithm: Emerging human-in-the-loop
work configurations. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 29:2, 101614. [Crossref]
464. Ana Correia Simoes, Jose Coelho Rodrigues, Pedro Neto. The impact of Industry 4.0 on work: A
synthesis of the literature and reflection about the future 1-7. [Crossref]
465. Damian Grimshaw. 2020. International organisations and the future of work: How new technologies
and inequality shaped the narratives in 2019. Journal of Industrial Relations 62:3, 477-507. [Crossref]
466. Andrés Chiappe, Ana María Ternent de Samper, Alejandro Emilio Wills, Ignacio Restrepo. 2020.
Rethinking 21st century schools: the quest for lifelong learning ecosystems. Ensaio: Avaliação e
Políticas Públicas em Educação 28:107, 521-544. [Crossref]
467. Alexander Richter, Michael Leyer, Melanie Steinhüser. 2020. Workers united: Digitally enhancing
social connectedness on the shop floor. International Journal of Information Management 52, 102101.
[Crossref]
468. Juan-Francisco Martínez-Cerdá, Joan Torrent-Sellens, Inés González-González. 2020. Socio-technical
e-learning innovation and ways of learning in the ICT-space-time continuum to improve the
employability skills of adults. Computers in Human Behavior 107, 105753. [Crossref]
469. Manel Djebrouni, Gregor Wolbring. 2020. Impact of robotics and human enhancement on occupation:
what does it mean for rehabilitation?. Disability and Rehabilitation 42:11, 1518-1528. [Crossref]
470. Javier Ortiz, Vicente Salas Fumás. 2020. Technological innovation and the demand for labor by firms
in expansion and recession. Economics of Innovation and New Technology 29:4, 417-440. [Crossref]
471. Jan Stentoft, Christopher Rajkumar. 2020. The relevance of Industry 4.0 and its relationship with
moving manufacturing out, back and staying at home. International Journal of Production Research
58:10, 2953-2973. [Crossref]
472. Daron Acemoglu, Pascual Restrepo. 2020. The wrong kind of AI? Artificial intelligence and the future
of labour demand. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 13:1, 25-35. [Crossref]
473. Anna Waldman-Brown. 2020. Redeployment or robocalypse? Workers and automation in Ohio
manufacturing SMEs. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 13:1, 99-115. [Crossref]
474. Judith Clifton, Amy Glasmeier, Mia Gray. 2020. When machines think for us: the consequences for
work and place. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 13:1, 3-23. [Crossref]
475. David Spencer, Gary Slater. 2020. No automation please, we’re British: technology and the prospects
for work. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 13:1, 117-134. [Crossref]
476. Alan Dignam. 2020. Artificial intelligence, tech corporate governance and the public interest regulatory
response. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 13:1, 37-54. [Crossref]
477. Patrick Beer, Regina H. Mulder. 2020. The Effects of Technological Developments on Work and
Their Implications for Continuous Vocational Education and Training: A Systematic Review. Frontiers
in Psychology 11. . [Crossref]
478. Jon Bokrantz, Anders Skoogh, Cecilia Berlin, Thorsten Wuest, Johan Stahre. 2020. Smart
Maintenance: an empirically grounded conceptualization. International Journal of Production Economics
223, 107534. [Crossref]
479. Violeta Sima, Ileana Georgiana Gheorghe, Jonel Subić, Dumitru Nancu. 2020. Influences of the
Industry 4.0 Revolution on the Human Capital Development and Consumer Behavior: A Systematic
Review. Sustainability 12:10, 4035. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 55 ---
480. N. V. Gaponenko, J. C. Glenn. 2020. Technology Industry 4.0: Problems of Labor, Employment and
Unemployment. Studies on Russian Economic Development 31:3, 271-276. [Crossref]
481. Lynn Wu, Lorin Hitt, Bowen Lou. 2020. Data Analytics, Innovation, and Firm Productivity.
Management Science 66:5, 2017-2039. [Crossref]
482. L. P . Bakumenko, E. A. Minina. 2020. International Index of Digital Economy and Society (I-DESI):
Trends in the Development of Digital Technologies. Statistics and Economics 17:2, 40-54. [Crossref]
483. Jerod White, Tara Behrend, Ian Siderits. Changes in Technology 69-100. [Crossref]
484. Jeffrey H. Greenhaus, Gerard A. Callalan. Implications of the Changing Nature of Work for the
Interface between Work and Nonwork Roles 467-488. [Crossref]
485. Muriel Clauson. The Future of Work 555-582. [Crossref]
486. Claus Bossen. 2020. Data work and digitization. XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students
26:3, 22-25. [Crossref]
487. Malin Gardberg, Fredrik Heyman, Pehr-Johan Norbäck, Lars Persson. 2020. Digitization-based
automation and occupational dynamics. Economics Letters 189, 109032. [Crossref]
488. Enghin Atalay, Phai Phongthiengtham, Sebastian Sotelo, Daniel Tannenbaum. 2020. The Evolution
of Work in the United States. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics  12:2, 1-34. [Abstract]
[View PDF article] [PDF with links]
489. Gary Herrigel. 2020. Industrial possibilities and false necessity: rethinking production, employment
and labor dynamics in the global economy1. Socio-Economic Review 18:2, 599-624. [Crossref]
490. Marina Savelyeva, Natalia Shumakova. 2020. Innovative approach to training industry 4.0 experts.
Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1515:3, 032065. [Crossref]
491. Mari Sako. 2020. Artificial intelligence and the future of professional work. Communications of the
ACM 63:4, 25-27. [Crossref]
492. E. Burton Swanson. 2020. How information systems came to rule the world: Reflections on the
information systems field. The Information Society 36:2, 109-123. [Crossref]
493. Aayushi Bajpayee, Mehdi Farahbakhsh, Umme Zakira, Aditi Pandey, Lena Abu Ennab, Zofia
Rybkowski, Manish Kumar Dixit, Paul Arthur Schwab, Negar Kalantar, Bjorn Birgisson, Sarbajit
Banerjee. 2020. In situ Resource Utilization and Reconfiguration of Soils Into Construction Materials
for the Additive Manufacturing of Buildings. Frontiers in Materials 7. . [Crossref]
494. Ignacio Apella, Rafael Rofman, Helena Rovner. Conceptual Framework 11-34. [Crossref]
495. Thomas Kemeny, Max Nathan, Dave O’Brien. 2020. Creative differences? Measuring creative
economy employment in the United States and the UK. Regional Studies 54:3, 377-387. [Crossref]
496. Daniel G. Garrett, Eric Ohrn, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato. 2020. Tax Policy and Local Labor Market
Behavior. American Economic Review: Insights 2:1, 83-100. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with
links]
497. Kinga Hat, Gernot Stoeglehner. 2020. Spatial Dimension of the Employment Market Exposition to
Digitalisation—The Case of Austria. Sustainability 12:5, 1852. [Crossref]
498. Thomas Østerlie, Eric Monteiro. 2020. Digital sand: The becoming of digital representations.
Information and Organization 30:1, 100275. [Crossref]
499. Miriam A. CHERRY. 2020. Regreso al futuro. Continuidad del diálogo sobre el trabajo y la tecnología
en la OIT. Revista Internacional del Trabajo 139:1, 1-25. [Crossref]
500. Antonio ALOISI, Valerio STEFANO. 2020. La reglamentación y el futuro del trabajo. La relación
de trabajo como factor de innovación. Revista Internacional del Trabajo 139:1, 51-74. [Crossref]
501. Miriam A. CHERRY. 2020. Retour vers le futur: le fil rouge du débat sur le travail et la technologie
au sein de l'OIT. Revue internationale du Travail 159:1, 1-27. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 56 ---
502. Antonio ALOISI, Valerio STEFANO. 2020. Réglementation et avenir du travail: la relation de travail
facilite l'innovation. Revue internationale du Travail 159:1, 53-77. [Crossref]
503. Miriam A. CHERRY. 2020. Back to the future: A continuity of dialogue on work and technology at
the ILO. International Labour Review 159:1, 1-23. [Crossref]
504. Antonio ALOISI, Valerio STEFANO. 2020. Regulation and the future of work: The employment
relationship as an innovation facilitator. International Labour Review 159:1, 47-69. [Crossref]
505. Cristiano Antonelli, Christophe Feder. 2020. The new direction of technological change in the global
economy. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 52, 1-12. [Crossref]
506. Guillermo Arenas Díaz, Andrés Barge-Gil, Joost Heijs. 2020. The effect of innovation on skilled and
unskilled workers during bad times. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 52, 141-158. [Crossref]
507. John Armour, Mari Sako. 2020. AI-enabled business models in legal services: from traditional law
firms to next-generation law companies?. Journal of Professions and Organization 7:1, 27-46. [Crossref]
508. Christoph Keding. 2020. Understanding the interplay of artificial intelligence and strategic
management: four decades of research in review. Management Review Quarterly 108. . [Crossref]
509. Nick O’Donovan. 2020. From Knowledge Economy to Automation Anxiety: A Growth Regime in
Crisis?. New Political Economy 25:2, 248-266. [Crossref]
510. Kim Normann Andersen, Jungwoo Lee, Helle Zinner Henriksen. 2020. Digital Sclerosis? Wind of
Change for Government and the Employees. Digital Government: Research and Practice  1:1, 1-14.
[Crossref]
511. Mykhailo ZVERYAKOV, Andrii GRYMALYUK. 2020. ECONOMIC THEORY, STATE POLICY
AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION. Economy of Ukraine 2019:11-12, 3-33. [Crossref]
512. Jan Lauren Boyles, Jared Meisinger. 2020. Automation and Adaptation: Reshaping journalistic
labor in the newsroom library. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media
Technologies 26:1, 178-192. [Crossref]
513. Sijeong Lim. 2020. Embedding technological transformation: the welfare state and citizen attitudes
toward technology. European Political Science Review 12:1, 67-89. [Crossref]
514. Alain Alcouffe, David le Bris. 2020. Technical Progress and Structural Change in Jean Fourastié’s
Theory of Development. History of Political Economy 52:1, 101-133. [Crossref]
515. Ester Camiña, Ángel Díaz-Chao, Joan Torrent-Sellens. 2020. Automation technologies: Long-term
effects for Spanish industrial firms. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 151, 119828. [Crossref]
516. J R Shackleton. 2020. Worrying about automation and jobs. Economic Affairs 40:1, 108-118. [Crossref]
517. Lucas Nunes Vieira. 2020. Automation anxiety and translators. Translation Studies  13:1, 1-21.
[Crossref]
518. Rita K. Almeida, Ana M. Fernandes, Mariana Viollaz. 2020. Software Adoption, Employment
Composition, and the Skill Content of Occupations in Chilean Firms. The Journal of Development
Studies 56:1, 169-185. [Crossref]
519. Guangsu Zhou, Gaosi Chu, Lixing Li, Lingsheng Meng. 2020. The effect of artificial intelligence on
China’s labor market. China Economic Journal 13:1, 24-41. [Crossref]
520. Sahara Sadik, Phillip Brown. 2020. Corporate recruitment practices and the hierarchy of graduate
employability in India. Oxford Review of Education 46:1, 96-110. [Crossref]
521. Sherry A. Glied, Richard G. Frank, Joanna Wexler. Mental Health Disability, Employment, and
Income Support in the Twenty-First Century 659-677. [Crossref]
522. Marko Orel, Ondřej Dvouletý. Transformative Changes and Developments of the Coworking Model:
A Narrative Review 9-27. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 57 ---
523. Irina Viktorovna Novikova. Digitisation: A New Form of Precarity or New Opportunities? 89-104.
[Crossref]
524. Stefano Sacchi, Dario Guarascio, Silvia Vannutelli. Risk of technological unemployment and support
for redistributive policies 277-295. [Crossref]
525. Chih-Mei Luo. There IS an Alternative: The Danish Formula of Inclusive Capitalism 167-203.
[Crossref]
526. Helena Fidlerová, Martina Porubčinová, Martin Fero, Ivana Novotná. Identification of Challenges and
Opportunities for Work 4.0 Competences Developing in Slovakia 44-72. [Crossref]
527. Martina Francesca Ferracane. Redesigning Traditional Education 329-343. [Crossref]
528. Peter Sunley, Ron Martin, Ben Gardiner, Andy Pike. 2020. In search of the skilled city: Skills and
the occupational evolution of British cities. Urban Studies 57:1, 109-133. [Crossref]
529. Melanie Arntz, Terry Gregory, Ulrich Zierahn. Digitization and the Future of Work: Macroeconomic
Consequences 1-29. [Crossref]
530. Hanna Nygren, Kari Nissinen, Juhani Rautopuro, Kati Mäkitalo, Kari Ullakko. Skills Behind the
Robotics – How to Re-educate Workers for the Future 197-200. [Crossref]
531. Giovanni Peri. 2020. SHOULD THE U.S. EXPAND IMMIGRATION?. Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management 39:1, 267-274. [Crossref]
532. Vincent Van Roy, Daniel Vertesy, Giacomo Damioli. AI and Robotics Innovation 1-35. [Crossref]
533. Katherine C. Kellogg, Melissa A. Valentine, Angéle Christin. 2020. Algorithms at Work: The New
Contested Terrain of Control. Academy of Management Annals 14:1, 366-410. [Crossref]
534. Ashlea C. Troth, David E. Guest. 2020. The case for psychology in human resource management
research. Human Resource Management Journal 30:1, 34-48. [Crossref]
535. Vincent Van Roy, Daniel Vertesy, Giacomo Damioli. AI and Robotics Innovation 1-35. [Crossref]
536. María Teresa Ballestar, Ángel Díaz-Chao, Jorge Sainz, Joan Torrent-Sellens. 2020. Knowledge, robots
and productivity in SMEs: Explaining the second digital wave. Journal of Business Research  108,
119-131. [Crossref]
537. N. S. Siddharthan. Paradigm Changes in Technology and Employment 3-12. [Crossref]
538. Mustafa Dinc. Humanitarian Local and Regional Economic Development: A Potential Answer to
Sustainability and Conflict Prevention in the Information Age 73-92. [Crossref]
539. Barry G. Blundell. Robotic Systems 579-684. [Crossref]
540. Barry G. Blundell. Ethics and the Environment 375-487. [Crossref]
541. Selena Chan. The Future of Trades Learning 167-182. [Crossref]
542. Srikant Devaraj, Emily J. Wornell, Dagney Faulk, Michael Hicks. Rural Job Loss to Offshoring and
Automation 89-115. [Crossref]
543. David A. Spencer. Attitudes to Work and the Future of Work: The View from Economics 53-63.
[Crossref]
544. Paola Tubaro, Antonio A Casilli, Marion Coville. 2020. The trainer, the verifier, the imitator:
Three ways in which human platform workers support artificial intelligence. Big Data & Society 7:1,
205395172091977. [Crossref]
545. W. David Holford. IT’s Impressive, but Sometimes Misleading Track Record 57-79. [Crossref]
546. W. David Holford. From Ancient Greece to the Digital Workplace: A Story of Mètis’ Usurpation
19-34. [Crossref]
547. W. David Holford. Knowledge, Power, and Hidden Risk 93-107. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 58 ---
548. Chiara Cimini, Fabiana Pirola, Roberto Pinto, Sergio Cavalieri. 2020. A human-in-the-loop
manufacturing control architecture for the next generation of production systems. Journal of
Manufacturing Systems 54, 258-271. [Crossref]
549. Andrea S. Wallace. Business Communication, Digital Innovation, and Decoding Possibilities for the
Student Receiver 223-239. [Crossref]
550. Valerio De Stefano. Algorithmic Bosses and What to Do About Them: Automation, Artificial
Intelligence and Labour Protection 65-86. [Crossref]
551. Joseph Kane, Kirsten Lydic. Basic Income Does Not Threaten Labor Markets 51-67. [Crossref]
552. Yann Ferguson. 2020. Puissance de calcul, force de l’emprise ? Critique de l’« organisation augmentée ».
Nouvelle revue de psychosociologie N°29:1, 157. [Crossref]
553. Phillip Brown, David James. 2020. Educational expansion, poverty reduction and social mobility:
Reframing the debate. International Journal of Educational Research 100, 101537. [Crossref]
554. M.S. Aphane, E.T. Khumisi, R.S. Mogale. 2020. “I have a name, I am not mop trolley”; The working
relationships in the operating theatre at a selected academic hospital. International Journal of Africa
Nursing Sciences 12, 100185. [Crossref]
555. Aleksandre Asatiani, Esko Penttinen, Joona Ruissalo, Antti Salovaara. Knowledge Workers’ Reactions
to a Planned Introduction of Robotic Process Automation—Empirical Evidence from an Accounting
Firm 413-452. [Crossref]
556. Aleksandr Christenko, Žilvinas Martinaitis, Simonas Gaušas. 2020. Specific and general skills:
Concepts, dimensions, and measurements. Competition & Change 24:1, 44-69. [Crossref]
557. Marco Bettiol, Eleonora Di Maria, Stefano Micelli. Industry 4.0 and Knowledge Management: An
Introduction 1-18. [Crossref]
558. Caf Dowlah. Introduction 1-15. [Crossref]
559. Martin Schneider, Simon Eisele. Personalwirtschaft 303-322. [Crossref]
560. Jacques Bughin. Artificial Intelligence, Its Corporate Use and How It Will Affect the Future of Work
239-260. [Crossref]
561. Halim Baş, İsmail Canöz. The Role of R&D Investments on Labor Force: The Case of Selected
Developed Countries 281-299. [Crossref]
562. Klaus Prettner, David E. Bloom. Empirical evidence on the economic effects of automation 47-65.
[Crossref]
563. Heikki Hiilamo, Henri Aaltonen. Modelling the Societal Division of Added Value Created Through
Manufacturing 4.0 211-232. [Crossref]
564. Indermit S. Gill, Kenan Karakulah. 2020. The Economics of AI-Based Technologies: A Framework
and an Application to Europe. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
565. Massimo Ragnedda. Connecting the Digital Underclass 85-104. [Crossref]
566. Flavio Calvino, Vincenzo Spiezia. The Digital Transformation and Labor Demand 1-17. [Crossref]
567. James P . Bagrow. 2020. Democratizing AI: non-expert design of prediction tasks. PeerJ Computer
Science 6, e296. [Crossref]
568. Maury Gittleman, Kristen Monaco. 2020. Truck-Driving Jobs: Are They Headed for Rapid
Elimination?. ILR Review 73:1, 3-24. [Crossref]
569. Antonina N. Pinchuk, Svetlana G. Karepova, Dmitry A. Tikhomirov. 2020. Social-humanitarian
trades in a digital society: the perceptions and professional adaptation of Moscow’s college students.
VESTNIK INSTITUTA SOTZIOLOGII 11:3, 43-60. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 59 ---
570. Evan Weingarten, Michael W. Meyer, Amit Ashkenazi, On Amir. 2020. Human Experts Outperform
Technology in Creative Markets. She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation 6:3, 301-330.
[Crossref]
571. M. Shuaib Mohamed Haneef, Aquil Ahmad Khan. Journalistic Practices and Algorithmic Governance
153-175. [Crossref]
572. Ivan P . L. Png. 2020. Automation, Job Design, and Productivity: Field Evidence. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
573. Sameer Khatiwada. How Technology Affects Jobs: A Smarter Future for Skills, Jobs, and Growth
in Asia 263-270. [Crossref]
574. Samuli Laato, Heidi Salmento, Emilia Lipponen, Henna Vilppu, Mari Murtonen, Erno Lehtinen.
Retention of University Teachers and Doctoral Students in UNIPS Pedagogical Online Courses
503-523. [Crossref]
575. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen, Michael ten Hompel, Veronika Kretschmer. Digitalisierung industrieller
Arbeit 495-512. [Crossref]
576. Valeriia Semenova, Mikhail Fridman. 2020. The impact of global scientific and education policy on
the staffing of innovative breakthrough. E3S Web of Conferences 210, 22003. [Crossref]
577. Alexander Spermann. Beendet die Digitalisierung das deutsche Jobwunder? 215-230. [Crossref]
578. Christos Makridis, Saurabh Mishra. 2020. The Relationship Between Artificial Intelligence and Well-
being: Evidence from 343 Metropolitan Areas. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
579. Mainak Bhattacharjee, Jayeeta Roy Chowdhury. Automation in Manufacturing: The Effects on
Formal and Informal Sectors 263-270. [Crossref]
580. Christiane Bischof-dos-Santos, Elisandreia de Oliveira. 2020. Production Engineering Competencies
in the Industry 4.0 context: Perspectives on the Brazilian labor market. Production 30. . [Crossref]
581. Marcel Eckardt. 2020. Minimum Wages in an Automated Economy. SSRN Electronic Journal  .
[Crossref]
582. Fabian Stephany. 2020. Does It Pay Off to Learn a New Skill? Revealing the Economic Benefits of
Cross-Skilling. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
583. Daniel Keum. 2020. Firing Costs and the Decoupling of Technological Invention and Post-Invention
Investments. SSRN Electronic Journal 25. . [Crossref]
584. Pietro Maffettone, Chiara Oldani. 2020. COVID-19: A Make or Break Moment for Global Policy
Making. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
585. James Avis. Post-Work, Post-Capitalism and the Fourth Industrial Revolution 73-102. [Crossref]
586. Michael Sony. 2020. Pros and cons of implementing Industry 4.0 for the organizations: a review and
synthesis of evidence. Production & Manufacturing Research 8:1, 244-272. [Crossref]
587. Luca Braidotti, Marco Mazzarino, Maurizio Cociancich, Vittorio Bucci. On the Automation of Ports
and Logistics Chains in the Adriatic Region 96-111. [Crossref]
588. Ozge Doguc. Robot Process Automation (RPA) and Its Future 469-492. [Crossref]
589. Edgar Oliver Cardoso Espinosa. The Development of the Management Competences at the
Postgraduate Level in the Context of the Fourth Industrial Revolution 95-111. [Crossref]
590. Shalin Hai-Jew. How and Why Is Work Meaningful (Beyond Survival Needs)? 72-124. [Crossref]
591. Dean Stroud, Victoria Timperley, Martin Weinel. 2020. Digitalized Drones in the Steel Industry: The
Social Shaping of Technology. Relations industrielles / Industrial Relations 75:4, 730-750. [Crossref]
592. Gérard P . Cachon, Karan Girotra, Serguei Netessine. 2020. Interesting, Important, and Impactful
Operations Management. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 22:1, 214-222. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 60 ---
593. Linhui Wang, Jing Zhao, Jia Sun, Zhiqing Dong. 2019. The impact of biased technology on
employment distribution and labor status in income distribution. Chinese Management Studies 14:1,
135-158. [Crossref]
594. Cesibel Valdiviezo-Abad, Tiziano Bonini. 2019. Intelligent automation in communication
management. Doxa Comunicación. Revista interdisciplinar de estudios de comunicación y ciencias sociales
:29, 169-196. [Crossref]
595. Fabiano Compagnucci, Andrea Gentili, Enzo Valentini, Mauro Gallegati. 2019. Robotization and
labour dislocation in the manufacturing sectors of OECD countries: a panel VAR approach. Applied
Economics 51:57, 6127-6138. [Crossref]
596. Alessandro Delfanti. 2019. Machinic dispossession and augmented despotism: Digital work in an
Amazon warehouse. New Media & Society 2, 146144481989161. [Crossref]
597. Kohei Kubota, Takahiro Ito, Fumio Ohtake. 2019. Long-term consequences of group work in Japanese
public elementary schools. Japan and the World Economy 52, 100980. [Crossref]
598. Sanjiv R. Das. 2019. The future of fintech. Financial Management 48:4, 981-1007. [Crossref]
599. Jeehee Min, Yangwoo Kim, Sujin Lee, Tae-Won Jang, Inah Kim, Jaechul Song. 2019. The Fourth
Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on Occupational Health and Safety, Worker's Compensation
and Labor Conditions. Safety and Health at Work 10:4, 400-408. [Crossref]
600. Thomas Dimopoulos, Nikolaos Bakas. 2019. Sensitivity Analysis of Machine Learning Models for
the Mass Appraisal of Real Estate. Case Study of Residential Units in Nicosia, Cyprus. Remote Sensing
11:24, 3047. [Crossref]
601. Elizabeth Hill, Marian Baird, Ariadne Vromen, Rae Cooper, Zoe Meers, Elspeth Probyn. 2019. Young
women and men: Imagined futures of work and family formation in Australia. Journal of Sociology
55:4, 778-798. [Crossref]
602. Yixiao Zhou, Rod Tyers. 2019. Automation and inequality in China. China Economic Review  58,
101202. [Crossref]
603. Tae Wan Kim, Alan Scheller-Wolf. 2019. Technological Unemployment, Meaning in Life, Purpose
of Business, and the Future of Stakeholders. Journal of Business Ethics 160:2, 319-337. [Crossref]
604. João Peixoto. 2019. Da era das migrações ao declínio das migrações? A transição para a mobilidade
revisitada. REMHU: Revista Interdisciplinar da Mobilidade Humana 27:57, 141-158. [Crossref]
605. Chigusa Okamoto. 2019. The effect of automation levels on US interstate migration. The Annals of
Regional Science 63:3, 519-539. [Crossref]
606. Alix J. Jansen, Linda A. White, Elizabeth Dhuey, Daniel Foster, Michal Perlman. 2019. Training and
Skills Development Policy Options for the Changing World of Work. Canadian Public Policy 45:4,
460-482. [Crossref]
607. Giovanni DOSI, Maria Enrica VIRGILLITO. 2019. ¿Hacia dónde evoluciona el tejido social
contemporáneo? Nuevas tecnologías y viejas tendencias socioeconómicas. Revista Internacional del
Trabajo 138:4, 639-674. [Crossref]
608. Giovanni DOSI, Maria Enrica VIRGILLITO. 2019. Whither the evolution of the contemporary social
fabric? New technologies and old socio‐economic trends. International Labour Review 158:4, 593-625.
[Crossref]
609. Giovanni DOSI, Maria Enrica VIRGILLITO. 2019. L'évolution du tissu social – entre nouvelles
technologies et tendances socio‐économiques anciennes. Revue internationale du Travail  158:4,
651-688. [Crossref]
610. Moshe A. Barach, Aseem Kaul, Ming D. Leung, Sibo Lu. 2019. Strategic Redundancy in the Use of
Big Data: Evidence from a Two-Sided Labor Market. Strategy Science 4:4, 298-322. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 61 ---
611. Johannes Beller, Alexander Miething, Enrique Regidor, Lourdes Lostao, Jelena Epping, Siegfried
Geyer. 2019. Trends in grip strength: Age, period, and cohort effects on grip strength in older adults
from Germany, Sweden, and Spain. SSM - Population Health 9, 100456. [Crossref]
612. Josep Lladós-Masllorens. 2019. ¿Nos robarán los robots los puestos de trabajo? Un vistazo al mercado
laboral en España. Oikonomics :12. . [Crossref]
613. Ruby Roy Dholakia. 2019. Ruby Roy Dholakia: autobiographical reflections of a female marketing
academic. Journal of Historical Research in Marketing 11:4, 355-375. [Crossref]
614. Alexander J. Karran, Théophile Demazure, Pierre-Majorique Leger, Elise Labonte-LeMoyne, Sylvain
Senecal, Marc Fredette, Gilbert Babin. 2019. Toward a Hybrid Passive BCI for the Modulation of
Sustained Attention Using EEG and fNIRS. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 13. . [Crossref]
615. Yann Ferguson. 1. Ce que l’intelligence artificielle fait de l’homme au travail. Visite sociologique d’une
entreprise 23-42. [Crossref]
616. John Howard. 2019. Artificial intelligence: Implications for the future of work. American Journal of
Industrial Medicine 62:11, 917-926. [Crossref]
617. Janette Dill, Melissa J. Hodges. 2019. Is healthcare the new manufacturing?: Industry, gender, and
“good jobs” for low- and middle-skill workers. Social Science Research 84, 102350. [Crossref]
618. Asad Javed, Muhammad Yasir, Abdul Majid, Hassan Ahmed Shah, Ehsan ul Islam, Shawana
Asad, Muhammad Waleed Khan. 2019. Evaluating the effects of social networking sites addiction,
task distraction, and self‐management on nurses' performance. Journal of Advanced Nursing  75:11,
2820-2833. [Crossref]
619. Zlatko Skrbiš, Jacqueline Laughland‐Booÿ. 2019. Technology, change, and uncertainty: maintaining
career confidence in the early 21st century. New Technology, Work and Employment  34:3, 191-207.
[Crossref]
620. Juan Manuel Davila Delgado, Lukumon Oyedele, Anuoluwapo Ajayi, Lukman Akanbi, Olugbenga
Akinade, Muhammad Bilal, Hakeem Owolabi. 2019. Robotics and automated systems in construction:
Understanding industry-specific challenges for adoption. Journal of Building Engineering 26, 100868.
[Crossref]
621. Tom Coupe. 2019. Automation, job characteristics and job insecurity. International Journal of
Manpower 40:7, 1288-1304. [Crossref]
622. Bartek Chomanski. 2019. Massive Technological Unemployment Without Redistribution: A Case for
Cautious Optimism. Science and Engineering Ethics 25:5, 1389-1407. [Crossref]
623. Saurabh Mishra, Bilal M. Ayyub. 2019. Shannon Entropy for Quantifying Uncertainty and Risk in
Economic Disparity. Risk Analysis 39:10, 2160-2181. [Crossref]
624. Benjamin Balsmeier, Martin Woerter. 2019. Is this time different? How digitalization influences job
creation and destruction. Research Policy 48:8, 103765. [Crossref]
625. Truman Packard, Ugo Gentilini, Margaret Grosh, Philip O’Keefe, Robert Palacios, David Robalino,
Indhira Santos. Prevailing Risk-Sharing Policies and Drivers of Disruption in the World of Work
27-60. [Crossref]
626. Eckhardt Bode, Robert Gold. 2019. Adult Training in the Digital Age (trans. Maria Yu. Beletskaya).
Scientific Research of Faculty of Economics. Electronic Journal 11:3, 38-54. [Crossref]
627. Quan Chen, Jing-An Wang, Ruiqiu Ou, Junhua Sun, Li-Chung Chang. 2019. Disruptive technologies
and career transition strategies of middle-skilled workers. Career Development International  24:5,
475-490. [Crossref]
628. Andrea Szalavetz. 2019. Digitalisation, automation and upgrading in global value chains – factory
economy actors versus lead companies. Post-Communist Economies 31:5, 646-670. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 62 ---
629. Caterina Calsamiglia, Sabine Flamand. 2019. A Review on Basic Income: A Radical Proposal for a Free
Society and a Sane Economy by Philippe Van Parijs and Yannick Vanderborght. Journal of Economic
Literature 57:3, 644-658. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
630. Claus Bossen, Kathleen H Pine, Federico Cabitza, Gunnar Ellingsen, Enrico Maria Piras. 2019. Data
work in healthcare: An Introduction. Health Informatics Journal 25:3, 465-474. [Crossref]
631. Tommaso Pardi. 2019. Fourth industrial revolution concepts in the automotive sector: performativity,
work and employment. Journal of Industrial and Business Economics 46:3, 379-389. [Crossref]
632. Paola Tubaro, Antonio A. Casilli. 2019. Micro-work, artificial intelligence and the automotive
industry. Journal of Industrial and Business Economics 46:3, 333-345. [Crossref]
633. Rita Strohmaier, Marlies Schuetz, Simone Vannuccini. 2019. A systemic perspective on socioeconomic
transformation in the digital age. Journal of Industrial and Business Economics 46:3, 361-378. [Crossref]
634. Isabel Rothe, Sascha Wischniewski, Patricia Tegtmeier, Anita Tisch. 2019. Arbeiten in der digitalen
Transformation – Chancen und Risiken für die menschengerechte Arbeitsgestaltung. Zeitschrift für
Arbeitswissenschaft 73:3, 246-251. [Crossref]
635. Andrea Ciarini. 2019. Rileggere gli occupati e i disoccupati. Note a partire dai volumi I paradossi della
disoccupazione, di A. Accornero e F. Carmignani, Sociologia della disoccupazione, di E. Pugliese, Se tre
milioni vi sembrano pochi, di L. Gallino. SOCIOLOGIA DEL LAVORO :154, 225-237. [Crossref]
636. Ralph P . Hall, Robert Ashford, Nicholas A. Ashford, Johan Arango-Quiroga. 2019. Universal
Basic Income and Inclusive Capitalism: Consequences for Sustainability. Sustainability 11:16, 4481.
[Crossref]
637. Antonio G. Gómez-Plana, María C. Latorre. 2019. Digitalization, Multinationals and Employment:
An Empirical Analysis of Their Causal Relationships. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik
239:3, 399-439. [Crossref]
638. Sabrina Genz, Markus Janser, Florian Lehmer. 2019. The Impact of Investments in New Digital
Technologies on Wages – Worker-Level Evidence from Germany. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie
und Statistik 239:3, 483-521. [Crossref]
639. Sabrina Genz, Lutz Bellmann, Britta Matthes. 2019. Do German Works Councils Counter or Foster
the Implementation of Digital Technologies?. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik  239:3,
523-564. [Crossref]
640. . References 111-141. [Crossref]
641. Yasuyuki Sawada. 2019. Infrastructure investments, technologies and jobs in Asia. International
Journal of Training Research 17:sup1, 12-25. [Crossref]
642. Thomas Schröder. 2019. A regional approach for the development of TVET systems in the light of
the 4th industrial revolution: the regional association of vocational and technical education in Asia.
International Journal of Training Research 17:sup1, 83-95. [Crossref]
643. Sungsup Ra, Unika Shrestha, Sameer Khatiwada, Seung Won Yoon, Kibum Kwon. 2019. The rise of
technology and impact on skills. International Journal of Training Research 17:sup1, 26-40. [Crossref]
644. Jamie Morgan. 2019. Will we work in twenty-first century capitalism? A critique of the fourth
industrial revolution literature. Economy and Society 48:3, 371-398. [Crossref]
645. Pedro Henrique Melo Albuquerque, Cayan Atreio Portela Bárcena Saavedra, Rafael Lima de Morais,
Yaohao Peng. 2019. The Robot from Ipanema goes Working: Estimating the Probability of Jobs
Automation in Brazil. Latin American Business Review 20:3, 227-248. [Crossref]
646. John Danaher. 2019. Embracing Human Obsolescence: Implications for the Enhancement Project.
The American Journal of Bioethics 19:7, 16-18. [Crossref]
647. Matthew K. Grace, Jane S. VanHeuvelen. 2019. Occupational variation in burnout among medical
staff: Evidence for the stress of higher status. Social Science & Medicine 232, 199-208. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 63 ---
648. Roddy McKinnon. 2019. Introduction: Social security and the digital economy – Managing
transformation. International Social Security Review 72:3, 5-16. [Crossref]
649. Shen Kian Tan, Sivan Rajah. 2019. Evoking Work Motivation in Industry 4.0. SAGE Open 9:4,
215824401988513. [Crossref]
650. Jordan D. Dworkin. 2019. Network-driven differences in mobility and optimal transitions among
automatable jobs. Royal Society Open Science 6:7, 182124. [Crossref]
651. Thomas Dimopoulos, Nikolaos Bakas. Artificial intelligence for mass appraisals of residential
properties in Nicosia: mathematical modelling and algorithmic implementation 69. [Crossref]
652. Alan K. Melby, Daryl R. Hague. A singular(ity) preoccupation 205-228. [Crossref]
653. John Hooker, Tae Wan Kim. Ethical Implications of the Fourth Industrial Revolution for Business
and Society 35-63. [Crossref]
654. Rei Akaishi. 2019. Multiple Scales of Neural Computations. The Brain & Neural Networks  26:1-2,
15-24. [Crossref]
655. Derek Walker, Beverley Lloyd-Walker. 2019. The future of the management of projects in the 2030s.
International Journal of Managing Projects in Business 12:2, 242-266. [Crossref]
656. Francesco Caselli, Alan Manning. 2019. Robot Arithmetic: New Technology and Wages. American
Economic Review: Insights 1:1, 1-12. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
657. Christian Peukert. 2019. The next wave of digital technological change and the cultural industries.
Journal of Cultural Economics 43:2, 189-210. [Crossref]
658. Ajay Agrawal, Joshua S. Gans, Avi Goldfarb. 2019. Exploring the impact of artificial Intelligence:
Prediction versus judgment. Information Economics and Policy 47, 1-6. [Crossref]
659. Giulia Montresor. 2019. Job polarization and labour supply changes in the UK. Labour Economics
58, 187-203. [Crossref]
660. Luca Marcolin, Sébastien Miroudot, Mariagrazia Squicciarini. 2019. To be (routine) or not to be
(routine), that is the question: a cross-country task-based answer†. Industrial and Corporate Change
28:3, 477-501. [Crossref]
661. Ronald Bachmann, Merve Cim, Colin Green. 2019. Long‐Run Patterns of Labour Market
Polarization: Evidence from German Micro Data. British Journal of Industrial Relations 57:2, 350-376.
[Crossref]
662. Richard Sharpe, Katherine van Lopik, Aaron Neal, Paul Goodall, Paul P . Conway, Andrew A. West.
2019. An industrial evaluation of an Industry 4.0 reference architecture demonstrating the need for
the inclusion of security and human components. Computers in Industry 108, 37-44. [Crossref]
663. Dana Darja Øye. 2019. Robotene er allerede her. En empirisk vurdering av automatisering og
endringer i yrkessammensetningen i det norske arbeidsmarkedet. Søkelys på arbeidslivet 36:1-02, 21-35.
[Crossref]
664. David H. Autor. 2019. Work of the Past, Work of the Future. AEA Papers and Proceedings 109, 1-32.
[Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
665. Taewoo Nam. 2019. Citizen attitudes about job replacement by robotic automation. Futures 109,
39-49. [Crossref]
666. Calvin Jones, Dylan Henderson. 2019. Broadband and uneven spatial development: The case of Cardiff
City-Region. Local Economy: The Journal of the Local Economy Policy Unit 34:3, 228-247. [Crossref]
667. Victor Oyaro Gekara. 2019. Humans and machines at work; Monitoring, surveillance and automation
in contemporary capitalismP .Moore, M.Upchurch, and X.Whittaker (2008), Cham, Switzerland:
Palgrave Macmillan. 253 pages. Price, £89.99. New Technology, Work and Employment 4. . [Crossref]

--- PAGE 64 ---
668. Joanna J. Bryson. 2019. Robot, all too human. XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students
25:3, 56-59. [Crossref]
669. Morgan R. Frank, David Autor, James E. Bessen, Erik Brynjolfsson, Manuel Cebrian, David J.
Deming, Maryann Feldman, Matthew Groh, José Lobo, Esteban Moro, Dashun Wang, Hyejin Youn,
Iyad Rahwan. 2019. Toward understanding the impact of artificial intelligence on labor. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 116:14, 6531-6539. [Crossref]
670. Rafa Madariaga, Joan Carles Martori, Ramon Oller. 2019. Wage income inequality in Catalonian
second-rank cities. The Annals of Regional Science 62:2, 285-304. [Crossref]
671. Shahper Richter, Lena Waizenegger, Melanie Steinhueser, Alexander Richter. 2019. Knowledge
Management in the Dark. International Journal of Knowledge Management 15:2, 1-19. [Crossref]
672. Ville-Veikko Pulkka. 2019. “This time may be a little different” – exploring the Finnish view on the
future of work. International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy 39:1/2, 22-37. [Crossref]
673. Ryan Gunderson. 2019. Work time reduction and economic democracy as climate change mitigation
strategies: or why the climate needs a renewed labor movement. Journal of Environmental Studies and
Sciences 9:1, 35-44. [Crossref]
674. Wolfgang Briglauer, Niklas S. Dürr, Oliver Falck, Kai Hüschelrath. 2019. Does state aid for broadband
deployment in rural areas close the digital and economic divide?. Information Economics and Policy
46, 68-85. [Crossref]
675. Katherine S. Welfare, Matthew R. Hallowell, Julie A. Shah, Laurel D. Riek. Consider the Human
Work Experience When Integrating Robotics in the Workplace 75-84. [Crossref]
676. Iyanatul Islam. 2019. Growth, New Technology and the Future of Work: International Evidence and
Implications for India. The Indian Journal of Labour Economics 62:1, 31-53. [Crossref]
677. W. Jackeline Torres, Brittany C. Bradford, Margaret E. Beier. Technology and the Aging Worker
608-640. [Crossref]
678. Outi Tuisku, Satu Pekkarinen, Lea Hennala, Helinä Melkas. 2019. “Robots do not replace a nurse
with a beating heart”. Information Technology & People 32:1, 47-67. [Crossref]
679. Andreu Mas-Colell. 2019. Is the Era of Work Coming to an End? Erasmus Lecture delivered at
the Budapest meeting of the Academia Europaea, 5 September 2017. European Review 27:1, 1-16.
[Crossref]
680. Koen Breemersch, Jože P Damijan, Jozef Konings. 2019. What drives labor market polarization in
advanced countries? The role of China and technology. Industrial and Corporate Change 28:1, 51-77.
[Crossref]
681. Orlando Gomes. 2019. Growth in the age of automation: Foundations of a theoretical framework.
Metroeconomica 70:1, 77-97. [Crossref]
682. Mohamed Goaied, Seifallah Sassi. 2019. The effect of ICT adoption on labour demand: A cross-
region comparison. Papers in Regional Science 98:1, 3-16. [Crossref]
683. Gregory Camilli, Ronil Hira. 2019. Introduction to Special Issue—STEM Workforce: STEM
Education and the Post-Scientific Society. Journal of Science Education and Technology  28:1, 1-8.
[Crossref]
684. Thomas A. Kochan, Christine A. Riordan, Alexander M. Kowalski, Mahreen Khan, Duanyi Yang.
2019. The Changing Nature of Employee and Labor-Management Relationships. Annual Review of
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 6:1, 195-219. [Crossref]
685. Orlando Gomes, Sónia Pereira. 2019. On the economic consequences of automation and robotics.
Journal of Economic and Administrative Sciences 36:2, 134-153. [Crossref]
686. Michael Leyer, Alexander Richter, Melanie Steinhüser. 2019. “Power to the workers”. International
Journal of Operations & Production Management 39:1, 24-42. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 65 ---
687. Denise Celentano. 2019. Automation, Labour Justice, and Equality. Ethics and Social Welfare 13:1,
33-50. [Crossref]
688. John Bachtler. 2019. 8. Bibliography. Regional Studies Policy Impact Books 1:1, 59-69. [Crossref]
689. Théophile Demazure, Alexander Karran, Élise Labonté-LeMoyne, Pierre-Majorique Léger, Sylvain
Sénécal, Marc Fredette, Gilbert Babin. Sustained Attention in a Monitoring Task: Towards a
Neuroadaptative Enterprise System Interface 125-132. [Crossref]
690. Clive R. Belfield, Thomas R. Bailey. The Labor Market Value of Higher Education: Now and in
the Future 373-414. [Crossref]
691. Manuel Au-Yong-Oliveira, Diogo Canastro, Joana Oliveira, João Tomás, Sofia Amorim, Fernando
Moreira. The Role of AI and Automation on the Future of Jobs and the Opportunity to Change
Society 348-357. [Crossref]
692. M. V. Simonova, S. Kolesnikov, N. Spravchikova. Interregional Aspects of Employment as a Factor in
the Formation of the Labor Potential 425-434. [Crossref]
693. Cecilia Toscanelli, Laurence Fedrigo, Jérôme Rossier. Promoting a Decent Work Context and Access
to Sustainable Careers in the Framework of the Fourth Industrial Revolution 41-58. [Crossref]
694. Josep Lladós-Masllorens. Surfing the Waves of Digital Automation in Spanish Labor Market 451-458.
[Crossref]
695. Krige Siebrits. Globalization and Social Protection: An Economic Perspective 255-279. [Crossref]
696. Stella Zilian, Laura Zilian. Die vierte Industrielle Revolution – eine neue Hoffnung? Technologischer
Fortschritt und Ungleichheit 145-164. [Crossref]
697. Jens Schröter. Digitale Medientechnologien und das Verschwinden der Arbeit 183-210. [Crossref]
698. Martin Ehrlich, Thomas Engel. Technik und Teilhabe. Wer entscheidet in der digitalen Arbeitswelt?
201-219. [Crossref]
699. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen, Peter Ittermann. Digitalisierung industrieller Einfacharbeit 99-117.
[Crossref]
700. Robert Obermaier. Industrie 4.0 und Digitale Transformation als unternehmerische
Gestaltungsaufgabe 3-46. [Crossref]
701. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen, Michael ten Hompel, Veronika Kretschmer. Digitalisierung industrieller
Arbeit 1-18. [Crossref]
702. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen. Autonome Systeme in der industriellen Arbeitswelt 69-86. [Crossref]
703. Wenke Apt, Kai Priesack. KI und Arbeit – Chance und Risiko zugleich 221-238. [Crossref]
704. Ralph Henn, Orestis Terzidis. Strukturwandel durch künstliche Intelligenz – Herausforderungen
und Chancen sowie der Einfluss der Rahmenbedingungen regionaler Gründungsökosysteme auf die
Auswirkungen für die Gesellschaft 69-95. [Crossref]
705. Jae Yup Jung. The Career Decisions of Gifted Students: An Asian-Pacific Perspective 1-18. [Crossref]
706. Edward J. Blakely, Richard Hu. The Smart Way Forward 219-255. [Crossref]
707. George Lăzăroiu. Educating for a Workless Society: Technological Advance, Mass Unemployment
and Meaningful Jobs 145-158. [Crossref]
708. Greg Thompson, Ian Cook. The Lack of Work and the Contemporary University 29-44. [Crossref]
709. Sam Sellar. Acceleration, Automation and Pedagogy: How the Prospect of Technological
Unemployment Creates New Conditions for Educational Thought 131-144. [Crossref]
710. Kim Jurgensen, Imraan Valodia. Technological Change and the Future of Work—Some Issues from
a Developing Country Perspective 115-126. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 66 ---
711. Pengqing Zhang. 2019. Automation, wage inequality and implications of a robot tax. International
Review of Economics & Finance 59, 500-509. [Crossref]
712. Jason Furman, Robert Seamans. 2019. AI and the Economy. Innovation Policy and the Economy  19,
161-191. [Crossref]
713. Marcel P Timmer, Sébastien Miroudot, Gaaitzen J de Vries. 2019. Functional specialisation in trade.
Journal of Economic Geography 19:1, 1-30. [Crossref]
714. Davide Consoli, Mabel Sánchez-Barrioluengo. 2019. Polarization and the growth of low-skill service
jobs in Spanish local labor markets. Journal of Regional Science 59:1, 145-162. [Crossref]
715. Siwei Cheng, Bhumika Chauhan, Swati Chintala. 2019. The Rise of Programming and the Stalled
Gender Revolution. Sociological Science 6, 321-351. [Crossref]
716. Irina L. Sizova, Irina A. Grigoryeva. 2019. Fragility of Labor and Employment in the Modern World.
Sociological Journal 25:1, 48-71. [Crossref]
717. Jens Prufer, Patricia Prufer. 2019. Data Science for Entrepreneurship Research: Studying Demand
Dynamics for Entrepreneurial Skills in the Netherlands. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
718. Robert J. Shiller. 2019. Narratives About Technology-Induced Job Degradation Then and Now.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
719. Santiago Melián-González. 2019. The Impact of Digital Technology on Work. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
720. Fabio D'Orlando. 2019. Technological Unemployment and the Resurgence of Political Economy.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
721. Michael Bernard Coelli, Jeff Borland. 2019. Behind the Headline Number: Why not to Rely on
Frey and Osborne’s Predictions of Potential Job Loss from Automation. SSRN Electronic Journal  .
[Crossref]
722. Hana Stojanova, Barbora Lietavcova, Ivona Vrdoljak Raguž. 2019. The Dependence of Unemployment
of the Senior Workforce upon Explanatory Variables in the European Union in the Context of Industry
4.0. Social Sciences 8:1, 29. [Crossref]
723. Heski Bar-Isaac, Raphaël Levy. 2019. Motivating Employees Through Career Paths. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
724. John Powell. 2019. Trust Me, I’m a Chatbot: How Artificial Intelligence in Health Care Fails the
Turing Test. Journal of Medical Internet Research 21:10, e16222. [Crossref]
725. John Armour, Mari Sako. 2019. AI-Enabled Business Models in Legal Services: From Traditional
Law Firms to Next-Generation Law Companies?. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
726. Øyvind Kvalnes. Automation and Ethics 69-77. [Crossref]
727. Jae Yup Jung. The Career Development of Gifted Students 325-342. [Crossref]
728. Michelle Hood, Peter A. Creed. Globalisation: Implications for Careers and Career Guidance 477-495.
[Crossref]
729. Carlos Hernán Fajardo-Toro, Andrés Aguilera-Castillo, Mauricio Guerrero-Cabarcas. Doing More
With Less 1-17. [Crossref]
730. Manuel Alejandro Barajas Bustillos, Aide Aracely Maldonado-Macías, Jorge Luis García-Alcaraz, Juan
Luis Hernández Arellano, Liliana Avelar Sosa. Considerations of the Mental Workload in Socio-
Technical Systems in the Manufacturing Industry 99-116. [Crossref]
731. E. Korn. 2019. Non-Digital Competencies for a Digital World: Why Higher Education Needs
Humanities and STEM Disciplines. Amerikastudien/American Studies 64:1, 95-109. [Crossref]
732. W. David Holford. 2019. The future of human creative knowledge work within the digital economy.
Futures 105, 143-154. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 67 ---
733. Malin Gardberg, Fredrik Heyman, Pehr-Johan Norbäck, Lars Persson. 2019. Digitization-Based
Automation and Occupational Dynamics. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
734. William C. Wheaton. 2019. Robots, Automation and the demand for Industrial Space. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
735. Yael Karlinsky-Shichor, Oded Netzer. 2019. Automating the B2B Salesperson Pricing Decisions: Can
Machines Replace Humans and When?. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
736. Andrew B Barbour, Jennifer M Frush, Luke A Gatta, William C McManigle, Niobra M Keah, Lorena
Bejarano-Pineda, Evan M Guerrero. 2019. Artificial Intelligence in Health Care: Insights From an
Educational Forum. Journal of Medical Education and Curricular Development  6, 238212051988934.
[Crossref]
737. Peter Fleming. 2019. Robots and Organization Studies: Why Robots Might Not Want to Steal Your
Job. Organization Studies 40:1, 23-38. [Crossref]
738. Thomas Kurer, Bruno Palier. 2019. Shrinking and shouting: the political revolt of the declining
middle in times of employment polarization. Research & Politics 6:1, 205316801983116. [Crossref]
739. Thomas Kurer, Aina Gallego. 2019. Distributional consequences of technological change: Worker-
level evidence. Research & Politics 6:1, 205316801882214. [Crossref]
740. Eric Dahlin. 2019. Are Robots Stealing Our Jobs?. Socius: Sociological Research for a Dynamic World
5, 237802311984624. [Crossref]
741. Carlo Borzaga, Gianluca Salvatori, Riccardo Bodini. 2019. Social and Solidarity Economy and the
Future of Work* This paper draws on a work that was previously published by the ILO and is
available at: http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/—ed_emp/—emp_ent/—coop/documents/
publication/wcms_573160.pdf (Copyright © International Labour Organization 2017.). Journal of
Entrepreneurship and Innovation in Emerging Economies 5:1, 37-57. [Crossref]
742. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen, Tobias Wienzek. Arbeit 4.0: Segen oder Fluch? 17-28. [Crossref]
743. David Kunst. 2019. Deskilling among Manufacturing Production Workers. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
744. Michele Fornino, Andrea Manera. 2019. Can Labor Survive the Automation Threat? Flexibility as
the Ultimate Comparative Advantage. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
745. Weiguang Wang, Guodong (Gordon) Gao, Ritu Agarwal. 2019. Friend or Foe? The Influence of
Artificial Intelligence on Human Performance in Medical Chart Coding. SSRN Electronic Journal
10. . [Crossref]
746. Pablo Egana-delSol. 2019. The Future of Work in Developing Economies: What Can We Learn from
the South?. SSRN Electronic Journal 159. . [Crossref]
747. Mathieu Aubry, Roman Kraeussl, Gustavo Manso, Christophe Spaenjers. 2019. Machines and
Masterpieces: Predicting Prices in the Art Auction Market. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
748. Arregui Pabollet, E., Bacigalupo, M., Biagi, F., Cabrera Giraldez, M., Caena, F., Castano Munoz,
J., Centeno Mediavilla, C., Edwards, J., Fernández-Macías, Enrique, Gomez Gutierrez, E., Gomez
Herrera, E., Inamorato dos Santos, A., Kampylis, P ., Klenert, D., López-Cobo, Montserrat,
Marschinski, R., Pesole, A., Punie, Y., Tolan, S., Torrejon Perez, S., Urzi Brancati, C., Vuorikari,
R.. The changing nature of work and skills in the digital age . [Crossref]
749. Arregui Pabollet, E., Bacigalupo, M., Biagi, F., Cabrera Giraldez, M., Caena, F., Castano Munoz,
J., Centeno Mediavilla, C., Edwards, J., Fernández-Macías, Enrique, Gomez Gutierrez, E., Gomez
Herrera, E., Inamorato dos Santos, A., Kampylis, P ., Klenert, D., López-Cobo, Montserrat,
Marschinski, R., Pesole, A., Punie, Y., Tolan, S., Torrejon Perez, S., Urzi Brancati, C., Vuorikari,
R.. The changing nature of work and skills in the digital age . [Crossref]

--- PAGE 68 ---
750. James Burnett, Cédric Brunelle. 2019. The Uneven Economic Diversification of Small and Mid-Sized
Canadian Cities, 1971-2016. Canadian Journal of Regional Science 42:2, 113-122. [Crossref]
751. Edvard P .G. Bruun, Alban Duka. 2018. Artificial Intelligence, Jobs and the Future of Work: Racing
with the Machines. Basic Income Studies 13:2. . [Crossref]
752. Marcus Tamm. 2018. Training and changes in job Tasks. Economics of Education Review 67, 137-147.
[Crossref]
753. Georg Graetz, Guy Michaels. 2018. Robots at Work. The Review of Economics and Statistics  100:5,
753-768. [Crossref]
754. Throy Alexander Campbell. 2018. A phenomenological study of business graduates’ employment
experiences in the changing economy. Journal for Labour Market Research 52:1. . [Crossref]
755. Andrea Salvatori. 2018. The anatomy of job polarisation in the UK. Journal for Labour Market
Research 52:1. . [Crossref]
756. Eugina Leung, Gabriele Paolacci, Stefano Puntoni. 2018. Man Versus Machine: Resisting Automation
in Identity-Based Consumer Behavior. Journal of Marketing Research 55:6, 818-831. [Crossref]
757. Andrés Ortega, Miguel Otero-Iglesias, Federico Steinberg. 2018. A globalisation challenge: preventing
a clash between the middle classes of the developed and emerging economies. Economics 12:1. .
[Crossref]
758. Eckhardt Bode, Robert Gold. 2018. Adult training in the digital age. Economics 12:1. . [Crossref]
759. Veronika Alexander, Collin Blinder, Paul J. Zak. 2018. Why trust an algorithm? Performance,
cognition, and neurophysiology. Computers in Human Behavior 89, 279-288. [Crossref]
760. Christiane Krieger-Boden, Alina Sorgner. 2018. Labor market opportunities for women in the digital
age. Economics 12:1. . [Crossref]
761. Mariachiara Barzotto, Lisa De Propris. 2018. Skill up: smart work, occupational mix and regional
productivity. Journal of Economic Geography 45. . [Crossref]
762. Alon Shepon, Patrik John Gustav Henriksson, Tong Wu. 2018. Conceptualizing a Sustainable Food
System in an Automated World: Toward a “Eudaimonian” Future. Frontiers in Nutrition 5. . [Crossref]
763. Scott A. Wright, Ainslie E. Schultz. 2018. The rising tide of artificial intelligence and business
automation: Developing an ethical framework. Business Horizons 61:6, 823-832. [Crossref]
764. Vincent Van Roy, Dániel Vértesy, Marco Vivarelli. 2018. Technology and employment: Mass
unemployment or job creation? Empirical evidence from European patenting firms. Research Policy
47:9, 1762-1776. [Crossref]
765. Victor Oyaro Gekara, Vi-Xuan Thanh Nguyen. 2018. New technologies and the transformation of
work and skills: a study of computerisation and automation of Australian container terminals. New
Technology, Work and Employment 33:3, 219-233. [Crossref]
766. Christopher Andrews. 2018. The End of Work or Overworked? Self-Service, Prosumer Capitalism,
and “Irrational Work”. Sociological Inquiry 88:4, 649-672. [Crossref]
767. Laurie S.M. Reijnders, Gaaitzen J. de Vries. 2018. Technology, offshoring and the rise of non-routine
jobs. Journal of Development Economics 135, 412-432. [Crossref]
768. Yugang He. 2018. A Study on the Impact of Artificial Intelligence Industry on Macroeconomy:
Evidence from United States of America. The East Asian Journal of Business Management 8:4, 37-44.
[Crossref]
769. Franciszek Kutrzeba. 2018. Smart skills and education in a future economy. e-mentor :74, 37-43.
[Crossref]

--- PAGE 69 ---
770. N. Loktyukhina, I. Novikova. 2018. Automation of Process Management as a Mechanism OF
Reducing the Precarious Employment. Living Standards of the Population in the Regions of Russia 14:3,
27-32. [Crossref]
771. Luke A Petach. 2018. Inequality and the Rate of Return on Capital: An Institutional Approach to
“The Piketty Problem”. Journal of Economic Issues 52:4, 925-946. [Crossref]
772. Emili Grifell-Tatjé, C.A. Knox Lovell, Pau Turon. 2018. The business foundations of social economic
progress. BRQ Business Research Quarterly 21:4, 278-292. [Crossref]
773. Martha Garcia-Murillo, Ian MacInnes, Johannes M. Bauer. 2018. Techno-unemployment: A
framework for assessing the effects of information and communication technologies on work.
Telematics and Informatics 35:7, 1863-1876. [Crossref]
774. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen. 2018. Die Pfadabhängigkeit digitalisierter Industriearbeit. Arbeit 27:3,
239-259. [Crossref]
775. Michael Hout. 2018. Americans’ occupational status reflects the status of both of their parents.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115:38, 9527-9532. [Crossref]
776. Andreas Hirschi. 2018. The Fourth Industrial Revolution: Issues and Implications for Career Research
and Practice. The Career Development Quarterly 66:3, 192-204. [Crossref]
777. Jens Schröter. 2018. Die originäre Umweltbedingung und ihre originäre Krisenhaftigkeit.
Internationales Jahrbuch für Medienphilosophie 4:1, 147-168. [Crossref]
778. 백백백, Seung-yoon Sophia Lee. 2018. Debating Universal Basic Income in South Korea. Korea Social
Policy Review 25:3, 37-71. [Crossref]
779. Patrick C. Kyllonen. 2018. Inequality, Education, Workforce Preparedness, and Complex Problem
Solving. Journal of Intelligence 6:3, 33. [Crossref]
780. Ross Boyd, Robert J. Holton. 2018. Technology, innovation, employment and power: Does robotics
and artificial intelligence really mean social transformation?. Journal of Sociology  54:3, 331-345.
[Crossref]
781. Salvatore Cominu. 2018. Tutti knowledge worker? Ricchezza e impoverimento dei lavori.
SOCIOLOGIA DEL LAVORO :151, 174-189. [Crossref]
782. James Avis. 2018. Socio-technical imaginary of the fourth industrial revolution and its implications
for vocational education and training: a literature review. Journal of Vocational Education & Training
1-27. [Crossref]
783. Richard B. Freeman. 2018. Ownership when AI robots do more of the work and earn more of the
income. Journal of Participation and Employee Ownership 1:1, 74-95. [Crossref]
784. Alan Cottey. 2018. Economic language and economy change: with implications for cyber-physical
systems. AI & SOCIETY 33:3, 323-333. [Crossref]
785. Daniela Freddi. 2018. Digitalisation and employment in manufacturing. AI & SOCIETY  33:3,
393-403. [Crossref]
786. Javier Gimenez, Santiago Tosetti, Lucio Salinas, Ricardo Carelli. 2018. Bounded memory probabilistic
mapping of out-of-structure objects in fruit crops environments. Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture 151, 11-20. [Crossref]
787. Andrew Berg, Edward F. Buffie, Luis-Felipe Zanna. 2018. Should we fear the robot revolution? (The
correct answer is yes). Journal of Monetary Economics 97, 117-148. [Crossref]
788. Shahrukh Rafi Khan. 2018. Reinventing capitalism to address automation: Sharing work to secure
employment and income. Competition & Change 22:4, 343-362. [Crossref]
789. I. Novikova. 2018. Strategy for Employment of the Population as a Mechanism of Minimizing
Precarisation. Living Standards of the Population in the Regions of Russia 14:2, 71-77. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 70 ---
790. Lea Hannola, Alexander Richter, Shahper Richter, Alexander Stocker. 2018. Empowering production
workers with digitally facilitated knowledge processes – a conceptual framework. International Journal
of Production Research 56:14, 4729-4743. [Crossref]
791. Paul Evans, Adam Smale, Ingmar Björkman. Macro Talent Management in Finland 170-189.
[Crossref]
792. Ahmad Alabdulkareem, Morgan R. Frank, Lijun Sun, Bedoor AlShebli, César Hidalgo, Iyad Rahwan.
2018. Unpacking the polarization of workplace skills. Science Advances 4:7. . [Crossref]
793. Klaus Prettner, Niels Geiger, Johannes A. Schwarzer. 2018. Die Auswirkungen der Automatisierung
auf Wachstum, Beschäftigung und Ungleichheit. Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik  19:2, 59-77.
[Crossref]
794. Fiona Tregenna. 2018. Sectoral Structure and Change: Insights from Marx. Review of Political
Economy 30:3, 443-460. [Crossref]
795. Jane Halteh, Jim Arrowsmith, Jane Parker, Theodore E. Zorn, Tim Bentley. 2018. The impact of
technology on employment: a research agenda for New Zealand and beyond. Labour & Industry: a
journal of the social and economic relations of work 28:3, 203-216. [Crossref]
796. Maarten Goos. 2018. The impact of technological progress on labour markets: policy challenges.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 34:3, 362-375. [Crossref]
797. Erik Buyst, Maarten Goos, Anna Salomons. 2018. Job polarization: an historical perspective. Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 34:3, 461-474. [Crossref]
798. Carl Benedikt Frey, Thor Berger, Chinchih Chen. 2018. Political machinery: did robots swing the
2016 US presidential election?. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 34:3, 418-442. [Crossref]
799. Hugh Lauder, Phillip Brown, Sin-Yi Cheung. 2018. Fractures in the education–economy relationship:
the end of the skill bias technological change research programme?. Oxford Review of Economic Policy
34:3, 495-515. [Crossref]
800. Abi Adams. 2018. Technology and the labour market: the assessment. Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 34:3, 349-361. [Crossref]
801. Fabian Ochsenfeld. 2018. Mercantilist dualization: the introduction of the euro, redistribution of
industry rents, and wage inequality in Germany, 1993–2008. Socio-Economic Review 16:3, 499-522.
[Crossref]
802. Matthias Stohr, Matthias Schneider, Christian Henkel. Adaptive Work Instructions for People with
Disabilities in the Context of Human Robot Collaboration 301-308. [Crossref]
803. Karine Constant, Patrick Domingues, Gérard Duchene, Amélie Guillin, Sandrine Kablan, Patrick
Lenain, Julie Lochard. Chapitre 5. Les impacts sociétaux de la mondialisation 175-214. [Crossref]
804. Gérard Valenduc. 2018. Les relations controversées entre les technologies numériques et l’emploi.
Reflets et perspectives de la vie économique Tome L VI:3, 33-46. [Crossref]
805. Daron Acemoglu, Pascual Restrepo. 2018. The Race between Man and Machine: Implications
of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment. American Economic Review  108:6,
1488-1542. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
806. Sandeep Kumar Kujur. 2018. Impact of Technological Change on Employment: Evidence from the
Organised Manufacturing Industry in India. The Indian Journal of Labour Economics 61:2, 339-376.
[Crossref]
807. Giovanni Peri. 2018. Did immigration contribute to wage stagnation of unskilled workers?. Research
in Economics 72:2, 356-365. [Crossref]
808. Adrian Mehic. 2018. Industrial employment and income inequality: Evidence from panel data.
Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 45, 84-93. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 71 ---
809. Jared B Fitzgerald, Juliet B Schor, Andrew K Jorgenson. 2018. Working Hours and Carbon Dioxide
Emissions in the United States, 2007–2013. Social Forces 96:4, 1851-1874. [Crossref]
810. 백백백. 2018. Precariat-in-the-Loop - Human labor in Artificial Intelligence and politics of technology.
Economy and Society null:118, 277-305. [Crossref]
811. Carlos Silva, Martinho Mota, Telmo Silva. Automated production of audiovisual informative content
1-6. [Crossref]
812. José Isidro García Melo, Ruth Edmy Cano Buitrón, Juan David Contreras. 2018. Proposal of a
Procedure for Automating an Industrial Process Using Petri Nets as a Formal Tool. Revista Politécnica
14:26, 29-41. [Crossref]
813. Matthew O'Brien, April Hall, John Schrauwen, Joyce van der Made. 2018. An open-source approach
to automation in organic synthesis: The flow chemical formation of benzamides using an inline liquid-
liquid extraction system and a homemade 3-axis autosampling/product-collection device. Tetrahedron
74:25, 3152-3157. [Crossref]
814. Kozo Kiyota, Sawako Maruyama. 2018. On the Demand for Female Workers in Japan: The Role of
ICT and Offshoring. Asian Economic Papers 17:2, 25-46. [Crossref]
815. Panos Constantinides, Ola Henfridsson, Geoffrey G. Parker. 2018. Introduction—Platforms and
Infrastructures in the Digital Age. Information Systems Research 29:2, 381-400. [Crossref]
816. Catherine Earl, Philip Taylor, Fabian Cannizzo. 2018. “Regardless of Age”: Australian University
Managers’ Attitudes and Practices Towards Older Academics. Work, Aging and Retirement  4:3,
300-313. [Crossref]
817. Charlene Liew. 2018. The future of radiology augmented with Artificial Intelligence: A strategy for
success. European Journal of Radiology 102, 152-156. [Crossref]
818. Ben Vermeulen, Jan Kesselhut, Andreas Pyka, Pier Saviotti. 2018. The Impact of Automation on
Employment: Just the Usual Structural Change?. Sustainability 10:5, 1661. [Crossref]
819. Imanol Arrieta-Ibarra, Leonard Goff, Diego Jiménez-Hernández, Jaron Lanier, E. Glen Weyl. 2018.
Should We Treat Data as Labor? Moving Beyond “Free”. AEA Papers and Proceedings  108, 38-42.
[Crossref]
820. Mark A. Dutz, Rita K. Almeida, Truman G. Packard. Introduction 1-9. [Crossref]
821. Mark A. Dutz, Rita K. Almeida, Truman G. Packard. A Conceptual Framework 17-26. [Crossref]
822. Jason Hecht. 2018. Research and development and labour productivity: do high-tech firms exhibit
labour- or capital-saving technical change?. Applied Economics 50:16, 1790-1811. [Crossref]
823. Labinot Demaj. 2018. Smart Government: Die Verwaltung und den Staat der Zukunft denken.
Informatik-Spektrum 41:2, 123-137. [Crossref]
824. Dimitrios Buhalis, Rosanna Leung. 2018. Smart hospitality—Interconnectivity and interoperability
towards an ecosystem. International Journal of Hospitality Management 71, 41-50. [Crossref]
825. Pankaj C. Patel, Srikant Devaraj, Michael J. Hicks, Emily J. Wornell. 2018. County-level job
automation risk and health: Evidence from the United States. Social Science & Medicine 202, 54-60.
[Crossref]
826. Mariacristina Piva. 2018. Caselli, Francesco: Technology differences over space and time. Journal of
Economics 123:2, 187-189. [Crossref]
827. 백백백, Jung Min Ryu, Choi, Jung-Eun. 2018. Digital revolution and welfare state reforms: Revisiting
social investment and social protection. Korea Social Policy Review 25:1, 3-43. [Crossref]
828. Giancarlo Corò, Dejan Pejcic. 2018. Cambiamento tecnologico e lavoro. gli impatti occupazionali di
industria 4.0. ECONOMIA E SOCIETÀ REGIONALE :1, 52-69. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 72 ---
829. Paolo Gubitta. 2018. I lavori ibridi e la gestione del lavoro. ECONOMIA E SOCIETÀ REGIONALE
:1, 70-82. [Crossref]
830. Peter Stauvermann, Ronald Kumar. 2018. Adult Learning, Economic Growth and the Distribution
of Income. Economies 6:1, 11. [Crossref]
831. Anja Ghetta, Andreas Hirschi, Anne Herrmann, Jérôme Rossier. 2018. A Psychological Description
of the Swiss Labor Market from 1991 to 2014. Swiss Journal of Psychology 77:2, 83-94. [Crossref]
832. Federico Fiorelli. 2018. Technological unemployment as frictional unemployment. Kybernetes 47:2,
333-342. [Crossref]
833. Joanna Wolszczak-Derlacz, Aleksandra Parteka. 2018. The effects of offshoring to low-wage countries
on domestic wages: a worldwide industrial analysis. Empirica 45:1, 129-163. [Crossref]
834. Flavio Calvino, Maria Enrica Virgillito. 2018. THE INNOVATION-EMPLOYMENT NEXUS: A
CRITICAL SURVEY OF THEORY AND EMPIRICS. Journal of Economic Surveys 32:1, 83-117.
[Crossref]
835. Joonmo Cho, Jinha Kim. 2018. Identifying Factors Reinforcing Robotization: Interactive Forces of
Employment, Working Hour and Wage. Sustainability 10:2, 490. [Crossref]
836. Morgan R. Frank, Lijun Sun, Manuel Cebrian, Hyejin Youn, Iyad Rahwan. 2018. Small cities face
greater impact from automation. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 15:139, 20170946. [Crossref]
837. Eric Monteiro, Thomas Østerlie, Elena Parmiggiani, Marius Mikalsen. Quantifying Quality: Towards
a Post-humanist Perspective on Sensemaking 48-63. [Crossref]
838. Nico Stehr, Alexander Ruser. Knowledge Society, Knowledge Economy, and Knowledge Democracy
475-494. [Crossref]
839. Alberto A. P . Cattaneo, Carmela Aprea. Visual Technologies to Bridge the Gap Between School and
Workplace in Vocational Education 251-270. [Crossref]
840. Gaye Karacay. Talent Development for Industry 4.0 123-136. [Crossref]
841. Petri Nokelainen, Timo Nevalainen, Kreeta Niemi. Mind or Machine? Opportunities and Limits of
Automation 13-24. [Crossref]
842. Claire Scoular, Esther Care. Teaching Twenty-First Century Skills: Implications at System Levels
in Australia 145-162. [Crossref]
843. Asbjørn Følstad, Vegard Engen, Ida Maria Haugstveit, J. Brian Pickering. Automation in Human-
Machine Networks: How Increasing Machine Agency Affects Human Agency 72-81. [Crossref]
844. Shasha Liu, Robin C. Sickles, Shiyi Zhang. On the Allocation of Productivity Growth and the
Determinants of U. S. Income Inequality 71-101. [Crossref]
845. Caf Dowlah. The New Nexus and the Emerging Trends in Global Employment and Specialization
307-376. [Crossref]
846. Vladyslav Vlasov, Felicita Chromjaková. The Effect of the Fourth Industrial Revolution Economies
and Management 541-549. [Crossref]
847. Sabine Pfeiffer. Industry 4.0: Robotics and Contradictions 19-36. [Crossref]
848. Sergio Paba, Giovanni Solinas. In Favour of Machines (But Not Forgetting the Workers): Some
Considerations on the Fourth Industrial Revolution 39-63. [Crossref]
849. Giulio Bosio, Tommaso Minola, Federica Origo, Stefano Tomelleri. Introduction 1-12. [Crossref]
850. Giulio Bosio, Annalisa Cristini. Is the Nature of Jobs Changing? The Role of Technological Progress
and Structural Change in the Labour Market 15-41. [Crossref]
851. Michael Winikoff. Towards Trusting Autonomous Systems 3-20. [Crossref]
852. Oliver Stengel. Die Neuerfindung der Ökonomie 9-19. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 73 ---
853. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen. Wandel und Gestaltung digitalisierter Industriearbeit 151-160. [Crossref]
854. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen, Michael ten Hompel, Peter Ittermann, Johannes Dregger, Jonathan
Niehaus, Thomas Kirks, Benedikt Mättig. „Social Manufacturing and Logistics“ – Arbeit in der
digitalisierten Produktion 175-194. [Crossref]
855. Martin Schneider, Simon Eisele. Personalwirtschaft 1-20. [Crossref]
856. Matthias Wrede. Digitalisierung der Arbeitswelt – Herausforderungen für die soziale Sicherung
377-392. [Crossref]
857. Hans-Jörg Naumer. Bedingungsloses Grundeinkommen für das zweite Maschinenzeitalter 109-118.
[Crossref]
858. Tania Sourdin, Richard Cornes. Do Judges Need to Be Human? The Implications of Technology
for Responsive Judging 87-119. [Crossref]
859. Daron mname Acemoglu, Pascual mname Restrepo. 2018. Artificial Intelligence, Automation and
Work. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
860. Ewan McGaughey. 2018. Will Robots Automate Your Job Away? Full Employment, Basic Income,
and Economic Democracy. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
861. Daron Acemoglu, Pascual Restrepo. 2018. Demographics and Automation. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
862. Penny Mealy, R Maria del Rio-Chanona, J. Doyne Farmer. 2018. What You Do at Work Matters:
New Lenses on Labour. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
863. Sylvie Delacroix. 2018. Computer Systems Fit for the Legal Profession?. SSRN Electronic Journal .
[Crossref]
864. Andrr van Hoorn. 2018. The Political Economy of Automation: Occupational Automatability and
Preferences for Redistribution. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
865. Matthew Harris, Lawrence Kessler, Matthew N. Murray, M. Elizabeth Glenn. 2018. Prescription
Opioids and Labor Market Pains: The Effect of Schedule II Opioids on Labor Force Participation and
Unemployment. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
866. Valerio De Stefano. 2018. Negotiating the Algorithmm: Automation, Artificial Intelligence and
Labour Protection. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
867. Simon F. Deakin, Christopher Markou. 2018. The Law-Technology Cycle and the Future of Work.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
868. Jason Furman, Robert Seamans. 2018. AI and the Economy. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
869. Sudheer Chava, Alex Oettl, Manpreet Singh, Linghang Zeng. 2018. The Dark Side of Technological
Progress? Impact of E-Commerce on Employees at Brick-and-Mortar Retailers. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
870. Nicolas Bueno. 2018. Introduction to the Human Economy. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
871. Hideki Nakamura, Joseph Zeira. 2018. Automation and Unemployment: Help Is on the Way. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
872. Penny Mealy, J. Doyne Farmer, Ricardo Hausmann. 2018. Determining the Differences that Matter:
Development and Divergence in US States Over 1850-2010. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
873. Anirudh Krishna. 2018. Globalised Growth in Largely Agrarian Contexts: The Urban–rural Divide.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
874. Hideki Nakamura, Masakatsu Nakamura. 2018. How Automation Affects the Rate of Unemployment
Via Diversity in Job Mismatch Possibilities. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]

--- PAGE 74 ---
875. Linda Glawe, Helmut Wagner. 2018. The Middle-Income Trap 2.0: The Increasing Role of Human
Capital in the Age of Automation and Implications for Developing Asia. SSRN Electronic Journal .
[Crossref]
876. Sang-yoon Song. 2018. 백백백백백 백백백백 백백 백백 (The Sources of Firm Size-Wage Premium: Evidence from
Employer-Employee Matched Data). SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
877. Moshe Barach, Aseem Kaul, Ming Leung, Sibo Lu. 2018. Small Numbers Bargaining in the Age of
Big Data: Evidence From a Two-Sided Labor Matching Platform. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
878. Bertin Martens, Songül Tolan. 2018. Will This Time Be Different? A Review of the Literature on
the Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Employment, Incomes and Growth. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
879. TOMPAGE. 2018. IMPLICATIONS FOR PRODUCT DESIGN AND INDUSTRY 4.0. i-
manager’s Journal on Software Engineering 13:1, 9. [Crossref]
880. Jonathan Ostry, Jorge Alvarez, Raphael Espinoza, Chris Papageorgiou. 2018. Economic Gains From
Gender Inclusion: New Mechanisms, New Evidence. Staff Discussion Notes 18:06, 1. [Crossref]
881. Goran Pitić, Nebojša Savić, Srđan Verbić. 2018. Digital transformation and Serbia. Ekonomika
preduzeca 66:1-2, 107-119. [Crossref]
882. 백백백, 백백백. 2018. The Relationship between the Technological Development and Occupations in a
Hyper-connected Society. Journal of Vocational Education & Training 21:1, 89. [Crossref]
883. David K. Lambert. 2018. Workforce Education and Technical Change Bias in U.S. Agriculture and
Related Industries. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 100:1, 338-353. [Crossref]
884. Prithwiraj Choudhury, Evan Starr, Rajshree Agarwal. 2018. Machine Learning and Human Capital:
Experimental Evidence on Productivity Complementarities. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
885. Paul Osterman. 2018. In Search of the High Road: Meaning and Evidence. ILR Review 71:1, 3-34.
[Crossref]
886. Alain Cohn, Tobias Gesche, Michel Andrr Marrchal. 2018. Honesty in the Digital Age. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
887. Rasmus Koss Hartmann. 2018. Foundations and Futures of Innovation Management Theory. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
888. Alexander Spermann. 2017. Basic Income in Germany: Proposals for Randomised Controlled Trials
using Nudges. Basic Income Studies 12:2. . [Crossref]
889. Volker H. Schmidt. 2017. Disquieting uncertainty. Three glimpses into the future. European Journal
of Futures Research 5:1. . [Crossref]
890. Jeff Borland, Michael Coelli. 2017. Are Robots Taking Our Jobs?. Australian Economic Review 50:4,
377-397. [Crossref]
891. John Torpey. 2017. The End of the World as We Know It?: American Exceptionalism in an Age of
Disruption. Sociological Forum 32:4, 701-725. [Crossref]
892. Kristina Matuzeviciute, Mindaugas Butkus, Akvile Karaliute. 2017. Do Technological Innovations
Affect Unemployment? Some Empirical Evidence from European Countries. Economies 5:4, 48.
[Crossref]
893. Frédéric Marty. 2017. Algorithmes de prix, intelligence artificielle et équilibres collusifs. Revue
internationale de droit économique t. XXXI:2, 83-116. [Crossref]
894. Joan Torrent-Sellens. 2017. El empleo ante la nueva oleada digital: ¿robots humanos o recursos
humanos?. Oikonomics :8, 90-102. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 75 ---
895. Raimundo Díaz-Díaz, Luis Muñoz, Daniel Pérez-González. 2017. Business model analysis of public
services operating in the smart city ecosystem: The case of SmartSantander. Future Generation
Computer Systems 76, 198-214. [Crossref]
896. Benjamin Shestakofsky. 2017. Working Algorithms: Software Automation and the Future of Work.
Work and Occupations 44:4, 376-423. [Crossref]
897. David J. Deming. 2017. The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market*. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 132:4, 1593-1640. [Crossref]
898. M. Harvey Brenner. 2017. Small networks, evolution of knowledge and species longevity: Theoretical
integration and empirical test. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 104, 314-322. [Crossref]
899. Hugo Castro Silva, Francisco Lima. 2017. Technology, employment and skills: A look into job
duration. Research Policy 46:8, 1519-1530. [Crossref]
900. David Weintrop, David C. Shepherd, Patrick Francis, Diana Franklin. Blockly goes to work: Block-
based programming for industrial robots 29-36. [Crossref]
901. Melanie Arntz, Terry Gregory, Ulrich Zierahn. 2017. Revisiting the risk of automation. Economics
Letters 159, 157-160. [Crossref]
902. Ibrahim Nouzil, Ali Raza, Salman Pervaiz. 2017. Social aspects of automation: Some critical insights.
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 244, 012020. [Crossref]
903. Laurentz E. Olivier, Ian K. Craig. Lights-out process control — Analysis and framework 398-403.
[Crossref]
904. Jayson L. Lusk. 2017. Evaluating the Policy Proposals of the Food Movement. Applied Economic
Perspectives and Policy 39:3, 387-406. [Crossref]
905. Greg Richins, Andrea Stapleton, Theophanis C. Stratopoulos, Christopher Wong. 2017. Big Data
Analytics: Opportunity or Threat for the Accounting Profession?. Journal of Information Systems 31:3,
63-79. [Crossref]
906. Emek Basker, Lucia Foster, Shawn Klimek. 2017. Customer-employee substitution: Evidence from
gasoline stations. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 83. . [Crossref]
907. Santiago Melián-González, Jacques Bulchand-Gidumal. 2017. Information technology and front
office employees’ performance. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management  29:8,
2159-2177. [Crossref]
908. Fei Peng, Sajid Anwar, Lili Kang. 2017. New technology and old institutions: An empirical analysis
of the skill-biased demand for older workers in Europe. Economic Modelling 64, 1-19. [Crossref]
909. Catherine Earl, Philip Taylor, Chris Roberts, Patrick Huynh, Simon Davis. The Workforce
Demographic Shift and the Changing Nature of Work: Implications for Policy, Productivity, and
Participation 3-34. [Crossref]
910. Agnieszka Piasna, Jan Drahokoupil. 2017. Gender inequalities in the new world of work. Transfer:
European Review of Labour and Research 23:3, 313-332. [Crossref]
911. Ville-Veikko Pulkka. 2017. A free lunch with robots – can a basic income stabilise the digital
economy?. Transfer: European Review of Labour and Research 23:3, 295-311. [Crossref]
912. S. Zemtsov. 2017. Robots and potential technological unemployment in the Russian regions: Review
and preliminary results. Voprosy Ekonomiki :7, 142-157. [Crossref]
913. Göran Roos, Zara Shroff. 2017. What will happen to the jobs? Technology-enabled productivity
improvement – good for some, bad for others. Labour & Industry: a journal of the social and economic
relations of work 27:3, 165-192. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 76 ---
914. Joshua Healy, Daniel Nicholson, Jane Parker. 2017. Guest editors’ introduction: technological
disruption and the future of employment relations. Labour & Industry: a journal of the social and
economic relations of work 27:3, 157-164. [Crossref]
915. Andreas Stückler. 2017. „Aktives Altern“ und die Krise der Arbeit. Soziale Probleme 28:1, 75-99.
[Crossref]
916. Oussama H. Hamid, Norris Lee Smith, Amin Barzanji. Automation, per se, is not job elimination:
How artificial intelligence forwards cooperative human-machine coexistence 899-904. [Crossref]
917. Matthias Murawski, Markus Bick. 2017. Digital competences of the workforce – a research topic?.
Business Process Management Journal 23:3, 721-734. [Crossref]
918. Martina Fuchs, Matthias Pilz, Judith Wiemann, Kristina Wiemann. 2017. Qualifizierung für
„Industrie 4.0“. Standort 41:2, 88-92. [Crossref]
919. Jaemin Jung, Haeyeop Song, Youngju Kim, Hyunsuk Im, Sewook Oh. 2017. Intrusion of software
robots into journalism: The public's and journalists' perceptions of news written by algorithms and
human journalists. Computers in Human Behavior 71, 291-298. [Crossref]
920. Mariana C. Arcaya, José F. Figueroa. 2017. Emerging Trends Could Exacerbate Health Inequities In
The United States. Health Affairs 36:6, 992-998. [Crossref]
921. Florian Butollo, Yannick Kalff. 2017. Entsteht der Postkapitalismus im Kapitalismus?. PROKLA.
Zeitschrift für kritische Sozialwissenschaft 47:187, 291-308. [Crossref]
922. Nick Bostrom. 2017. Strategic Implications of Openness in AI Development. Global Policy  8:2,
135-148. [Crossref]
923. Gérard Valenduc, Patricia Vendramin. 2017. Digitalisation, between disruption and evolution.
Transfer: European Review of Labour and Research 23:2, 121-134. [Crossref]
924. Bertrand Audrin, Eric Davoine. 2017. La fonction RH face à la numérisation des organisations : le
cas des outils de communication numérique. Management & Avenir N° 92:2, 15-39. [Crossref]
925. Mark A. Dutz, Lucas Ferreira Mation, Stephen D. O’Connell, Robert D. Willig. 2017. Economy-
wide and Sectoral Impacts on Workers of Brazil’s Internet Rollout. Forum for Social Economics 46:2,
160-177. [Crossref]
926. Masayuki Morikawa. 2017. FIRMS' EXPECTATIONS ABOUT THE IMPACT OF AI AND
ROBOTICS: EVIDENCE FROM A SURVEY. Economic Inquiry 55:2, 1054-1063. [Crossref]
927. Bent Greve. 2017. Welfare States and Labour Market Change: What is the Possible Relation?. Social
Policy & Administration 51:2, 389-403. [Crossref]
928. Joachim Krause. 2017. ‘The Times They are a Changin' – Fundamental Structural Change in
International Relations as a Challenge for Germany and Europe. SIRIUS - Zeitschrift für Strategische
Analysen 1:1, 3-23. [Crossref]
929. Joachim Krause. 2017. Die neue Zeitenwende in den internationalen Beziehungen – Konsequenzen für
deutsche und europäische Politik. SIRIUS - Zeitschrift für Strategische Analysen 1:1, 3-24. [Crossref]
930. Martin Falk, Federico Biagi. 2017. Relative demand for highly skilled workers and use of different
ICT technologies. Applied Economics 49:9, 903-914. [Crossref]
931. Carl-Gustav Linden. 2017. Decades of Automation in the Newsroom. Digital Journalism 5:2, 123-140.
[Crossref]
932. John Danaher. 2017. Will Life Be Worth Living in a World Without Work? Technological
Unemployment and the Meaning of Life. Science and Engineering Ethics 23:1, 41-64. [Crossref]
933. Kozo Kiyota, Sawako Maruyama. 2017. ICT, offshoring, and the demand for part-time workers: The
case of Japanese manufacturing. Journal of Asian Economics 48, 75-86. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 77 ---
934. Devdatt Dubhashi, Shalom Lappin. 2017. AI dangers. Communications of the ACM  60:2, 43-45.
[Crossref]
935. Henri Schildt. 2017. Big data and organizational design – the brave new world of algorithmic
management and computer augmented transparency. Innovation 19:1, 23-30. [Crossref]
936. Nico Stehr, Alexander Ruser. Knowledge Society, Knowledge Economy and Knowledge Democracy
1-20. [Crossref]
937. Doug Woodward. Agglomeration and Automation in the Twenty-First Century: Prospects for
Regional Research 97-117. [Crossref]
938. Melanie Swan. Is Technological Unemployment Real? An Assessment and a Plea for Abundance
Economics 19-33. [Crossref]
939. John Danaher. Building a Post-work Utopia: Technological Unemployment, Life Extension, and the
Future of Human Flourishing 63-82. [Crossref]
940. Scott Santens. Unconditional Basic Income as a Solution to Technological Unemployment 107-116.
[Crossref]
941. Pamela Meil, Vassil Kirov. Introduction: The Policy Implications of Virtual Work 3-28. [Crossref]
942. Alex Tarter. Importance of Cyber Security 213-230. [Crossref]
943. Halla B. Holmarsdottir, Kendra Dupuy. Global Perspectives on Youth and School-to-Work
Transitions in the Twenty-First Century: New Challenges and Opportunities in Skills Training
Programs 23-42. [Crossref]
944. Robert Obermaier. Industrie 4.0 als unternehmerische Gestaltungsaufgabe: Strategische und operative
Handlungsfelder für Industriebetriebe 3-34. [Crossref]
945. Volker Wittpahl. Arbeiten und Lernen 60-117. [Crossref]
946. Michael Decker, Martin Fischer, Ingrid Ott. 2017. Service Robotics and Human Labor: A first
technology assessment of substitution and cooperation. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 87, 348-354.
[Crossref]
947. Ruth Bridgstock. The University and the Knowledge Network: A New Educational Model for
Twenty-first Century Learning and Employability 339-358. [Crossref]
948. Timothy Bresnahan, Pai-Ling Yin. 2017. Adoption of New Information and Communications
Technologies in the Workplace Today. Innovation Policy and the Economy 17, 95-124. [Crossref]
949. Wenlu Hu, Ziqiang Feng, Zhuo Chen, Jan Harkes, Padmanabhan Pillai, Mahadev Satyanarayanan.
Live Synthesis of Vehicle-Sourced Data Over 4G LTE 161-170. [Crossref]
950. Rod Tyers, Yixiao Zhou. 2017. Automation and Inequality with Taxes and Transfers. SSRN Electronic
Journal . [Crossref]
951. Y. D. Ahn. 2017. Entrepreneurial Socialism in 2050?. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
952. David N. Beede, Regina Powers, Cassandra Ingram. 2017. The Employment Impact of Autonomous
Vehicles. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
953. Yixiao Zhou, Rod Tyers. 2017. Automation and Inequality in China. SSRN Electronic Journal  .
[Crossref]
954. Mercedes Delgado, Karen Mills. 2017. A New Categorization of the U.S. Economy: The Role
of Supply Chain Industries in Innovation and Economic Performance. SSRN Electronic Journal  .
[Crossref]
955. SUNIL MANI. 2017. Robot Apocalypse: Does It Matter for Indiaas Manufacturing Industry?. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
956. . What Will Happen to the Jobs? 61-113. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 78 ---
957. P . Thomas Hackett, Pamela A. Lemoine, Michael D. Richardson. Impact of Technology Ambiguity
on Leadership in Global Higher Education 270-281. [Crossref]
958. Matthew Fifolt, Justin Blackburn, David J. Rhodes, Shemeka Gillespie, Aleena Bennett, Paul Wolff,
Andrew Rucks. 2017. Man Versus Machine. Quality Management in Health Care  26:3, 131-135.
[Crossref]
959. Edelgard Kutzner, Victoria Schnier. 2017. Geschlechterverhältnisse in Digitalisierungsprozessen von
Arbeit. Arbeit 26:1. . [Crossref]
960. Hartmut Hirsch-Kreinsen. 2017. Digitalisierung industrieller Einfacharbeit. Arbeit 26:1. . [Crossref]
961. Ewan McGaughey. 2017. Will Robots Take Your Job? Automaton, Inequality, Full Employment and
Law (Presentation Slides). SSRN Electronic Journal 29. . [Crossref]
962. Marc Bourreau, Thierry Pénard. 2016. Introduction. L’économie numérique en question. Revue
d'économie industrielle :156, 11-15. [Crossref]
963. Miles Corak. 2016. ‘Inequality is the root of social evil,’ or Maybe Not? Two Stories about Inequality
and Public Policy. Canadian Public Policy 42:4, 367-414. [Crossref]
964. Giovanni Peri. 2016. Immigrants, Productivity, and Labor Markets. Journal of Economic Perspectives
30:4, 3-30. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF with links]
965. Uwe Deichmann, Aparajita Goyal, Deepak Mishra. 2016. Will digital technologies transform
agriculture in developing countries?. Agricultural Economics 47:S1, 21-33. [Crossref]
966. Charles M. Beach. 2016. Changing income inequality: A distributional paradigm for Canada.
Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'économique 49:4, 1229-1292. [Crossref]
967. . The Intelligent Enterprise of Tomorrow 109-132. [Crossref]
968. Enrique Fernández-Macías, John Hurley. 2016. Routine-biased technical change and job polarization
in Europe. Socio-Economic Review 29, mww016. [Crossref]
969. Philippe Askenazy. 2016. L’emploi face au changement technologique. Idées économiques et sociales N
° 185:3, 45-51. [Crossref]
970. John Danaher. 2016. An evaluative conservative case for biomedical enhancement. Journal of Medical
Ethics 42:9, 611-618. [Crossref]
971. M. Diane Burton, Lisa E. Cohen, Michael Lounsbury. Introduction: Bringing Jobs Back In: Toward
a New Multi-Level Approach to the Study of Work and Organizations 1-22. [Crossref]
972. D. Roderick Kiewiet. 2016. What’s Right, and What’s Wrong, with “What is Wrong with the West’s
Economies?” by Edmund Phelps. Homo Oeconomicus 33:1-2, 11-18. [Crossref]
973. Fredrik Heyman. 2016. Job polarization, job tasks and the role of firms. Economics Letters  145,
246-251. [Crossref]
974. Roman Senderek. A Model for Learning-Enhancing Work Design in a Digitized World 349-353.
[Crossref]
975. Yew-Kwang Ng. 2016. SEPARATING EFFICIENCY AND EQUALITY, AUTOMATION, AND
PIKETTY'S THEORY OF INCREASING CAPITAL SHARE. Contemporary Economic Policy
34:3, 396-398. [Crossref]
976. Peter A. Diamond. 2016. ADDRESSING THE FORCES DRIVING INEQUALITY IN THE
UNITED STATES. Contemporary Economic Policy 34:3, 403-411. [Crossref]
977. Dongha Kim, Jinook Jeong. 2016. Electricity restructuring, greenhouse gas emissions efficiency and
employment reallocation. Energy Policy 92, 468-476. [Crossref]
978. Peter Temin. 2016. The American Dual Economy. International Journal of Political Economy  45:2,
85-123. [Crossref]

--- PAGE 79 ---
979. Robert Obermaier. Industrie 4.0 als unternehmerische Gestaltungsaufgabe: Strategische und operative
Handlungsfelder für Industriebetriebe 3-34. [Crossref]
980. Dirk Van Damme. Transcending Boundaries: Educational Trajectories, Subject Domains, and Skills
Demands 127-142. [Crossref]
981. Brad J. Hershbein, Lisa B. Kahn. 2016. Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Technological
Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
982. Alain Alcouffe. 2016. Our Current 'Secular Stagnation' as Expected by Jean Fourastii, 1949. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
983. Terry Gregory, Anna Salomons, Ulrich Zierahn. 2016. Racing with or Against the Machine? Evidence
from Europe. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
984. Aristotelis Boukouras. 2016. Capitalist Spirit and the Markets: Why Income Inequality Matters. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
985. Richard McGahey. 2016. Universal Basic Income and the Welfare State. SSRN Electronic Journal .
[Crossref]
986. Eckhardt Bode, Stephan Brunow, Ingrid Ott, Alina Sorgner. 2016. Worker Personality: Another Skill
Bias Beyond Education in the Digital Age. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
987. Richard Thomas Watson, Mikael Lind. 2016. A Research Agenda for Self-Organizing Ecosystems:
The Case for Maritime Informatics. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
988. Louis Chauvel, Anne Hartung. 2016. Malaise in the Western Middle Classes. SSRN Electronic Journal
. [Crossref]
989. Denis Kessler, Philippe Trainar. 2016. Le retour du débat sur les inégalités. Commentaire
Numéro154:2, 244. [Crossref]
990. Rudi Bonfiglioli, Federico Nanni. From Close to Distant and Back: How to Read with the Help of
Machines 87-100. [Crossref]
991. Greg Richins, Theophanis C. Stratopoulos, Christopher Wong. 2016. Data Analytics and Big Data:
Opportunity or Threat for the Accounting Profession?. SSRN Electronic Journal 29. . [Crossref]
992. Enzo Weber. 2016. Industrie 4.0: Wirkungen auf den Arbeitsmarkt und politische Herausforderungen.
Zeitschrift für Wirtschaftspolitik 65:1. . [Crossref]
993. Peter Navarro. 2015. How Economics Faculty Can Survive (and Perhaps Thrive) in a Brave New
Online World. Journal of Economic Perspectives  29:4, 155-176. [Abstract] [View PDF article] [PDF
with links]
994. Peter Temin. 2015. The American Dual Economy: Race, Globalization, and the Politics of Exclusion.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
995. Richard Thomas Watson, Mikael Lind. 2015. A Research Agenda for Self-Organizing Ecosystems:
The Case for Maritime Informatics. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
996. Emek Basker, Lucia Foster, Shawn D. Klimek. 2015. Customer-Labor Substitution: Evidence from
Gasoline Stations. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
997. Kazuhiro Yuki. 2013. Mechanization, Task Assignment, and Inequality. SSRN Electronic Journal 118. .
[Crossref]