

--- PAGE 1 ---
Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 33, Number 2—Spring 2019—Pages 3–30
T
he implications of technological change for employment and wages are a 
source of controversy. Some see the ongoing process of automation—as 
exemplified by computer numerical control machinery, industrial robots, 
and artificial intelligence—as the harbinger of widespread joblessness. Others 
reason that current automation, like previous waves of technologies, will ultimately 
increase labor demand, and thus employment and wages.
This paper presents a task-based framework, building on Acemoglu and 
Restrepo (2018a, 2018b) as well as Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Autor, Levy, and 
Murnane (2003), and Zeira (1998), for thinking through the implications of tech-
nology for labor demand and productivity. Production requires tasks, which are 
allocated to capital or labor. New technologies not only increase the productivity of 
capital and labor at tasks they currently perform, but also impact the allocation of 
tasks to these factors of production—what we call the task content of production . Shifts 
in the task content of production can have major effects for how labor demand 
changes as well as for productivity.
Automation corresponds to the development and adoption of new technolo-
gies that enable capital to be substituted for labor in a range of tasks. Automation 
changes the task content of production adversely for labor because of a displacement 
effect—as capital takes over tasks previously performed by labor. The displacement 
Automation and New Tasks: How 
Technology Displaces and Reinstates 
Labor
■ Daron Acemoglu is Elizabeth and James Killian Professor of Economics, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Pascual Restrepo is Assistant Professor of 
Economics, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts. Their emails are daron@mit.edu and 
pascual@bu.edu.
† For supplementary materials such as appendices, datasets, and author disclosure statements, see the 
article page at
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.2.3 doi=10.1257/jep.33.2.3
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo 

--- PAGE 2 ---
4     Journal of Economic Perspectives
effect implies that automation reduces the labor share of value added. Historical 
examples of automation are aplenty. Many early innovations of the Industrial Revo-
lution automated tasks performed by artisans in spinning and weaving (Mantoux 
1928), which led to widespread displacement, triggering the Luddite riots (Mokyr 
1990). The mechanization of agriculture, which picked up speed with horse-powered 
reapers, harvesters, and plows in the second half of the 19th century and with trac-
tors and combine harvesters in the 20th century, displaced agricultural workers in 
large numbers (Rasmussen 1982; Olmstead and Rhode 2001). Today too we are 
witnessing a period of rapid automation. The jobs of production workers are being 
disrupted with the rise of industrial robots and other automated machinery (Graetz 
and Michaels 2018; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018b), while white-collar workers in 
accounting, sales, logistics, trading, and some managerial occupations are seeing 
some of the tasks they used to perform being replaced by specialized software and 
artificial intelligence.
By allowing a more flexible allocation of tasks to factors, automation technology 
also increases productivity, and via this channel, which we call the productivity effect , 
it contributes to the demand for labor in non-automated tasks. The net impact of 
automation on labor demand thus depends on how the displacement and produc-
tivity effects weigh against each other.
The history of technology is not only about the displacement of human labor 
by automation technologies. If it were, we would be confined to a shrinking set 
of old tasks and jobs, with a steadily declining labor share in national income. 
Instead, the displacement effect of automation has been counterbalanced by tech-
nologies that create new tasks in which labor has a comparative advantage. Such 
new tasks generate not only a positive productivity effect, but also a reinstatement 
effect —they reinstate labor into a broader range of tasks and thus change the task 
content of production in favor of labor.
1 The reinstatement effect is the polar 
opposite of the displacement effect and directly increases the labor share as well 
as labor demand.
History is also replete with examples of the creation of new tasks and the rein-
statement effect. In the 19th century, as automation of some tasks was ongoing, other 
technological developments generated employment opportunities in new occu-
pations. These included jobs for line workers, engineers, machinists, repairmen, 
conductors, managers, and financiers (Chandler 1977; Mokyr 1990). New occu-
pations and jobs in new industries also played a pivotal role in generating labor 
demand during the decades of rapid agricultural mechanization in the United States, 
especially in factories (Rasmussen 1982; Olmsted and Rhode 2001) and in clerical 
occupations, both in services and manufacturing (Goldin and Katz 2008; Michaels 
2007). Although software and computers have replaced labor in some white-collar 
tasks, they have simultaneously created many new tasks. These include tasks related 
1 There are also new tasks in which capital has a comparative advantage (for example, automated detec-
tion). Throughout our focus is on “labor-intensive” new tasks, and for brevity, we will simply refer to these 
as “new tasks.”

--- PAGE 3 ---
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo     5
to programming, design, and maintenance of high tech equipment, such as software 
and app development, database design and analysis, and computer-security-related 
tasks, as well as tasks related to more specialized functions in existing occupations, 
including administrative assistants, analysts for loan applications, and medical equip-
ment technicians (Lin 2011). In Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a, using data from Lin 
2011), we show that about half of employment growth over 1980–2015 took place in 
occupations in which job titles or tasks performed by workers changed.
Our conceptual framework offers several lessons. First, the presumption that all 
technologies increase (aggregate) labor demand simply because they raise produc-
tivity is wrong. Some automation technologies may in fact reduce labor demand 
because they bring sizable displacement effects but modest productivity gains 
(especially when substituted workers were cheap to begin with and the automated 
technology is only marginally better than them). Second, because of the displacement 
effect, we should not expect automation to create wage increases commensurate with 
productivity growth. In fact, as we noted already, automation by itself always reduces 
the labor share in industry value added and tends to reduce the overall labor share in 
the economy (meaning that it leads to slower wage growth than productivity growth). 
The reason why we have had rapid wage growth and stable labor shares in the past is 
a consequence of other technological changes that generated new tasks for labor and 
counterbalanced the effects of automation on the task content of production. Some 
technologies displaced labor from automated tasks while others reinstated labor into 
new tasks. On net, labor retained a key role in production. By the same token, our 
framework suggests that the future of work depends on the mixture of new technolo-
gies and how these change the task content of production.
In the second part of the paper, we use our framework to study the evolution 
of labor demand in the United States since World War II and explain how industry 
data can be used to infer the behavior of the task content of production and the 
displacement and reinstatement effects. We start by showing that there has been a 
slowdown in the growth of labor demand over the last three decades and an almost 
complete stagnation over the last two. We establish this by studying the evolution 
of the economy-wide wage bill, which combines information on average wages and 
total employment and is thus informative about changes in overall labor demand. 
We then use industry data to decompose changes in the economy-wide wage bill 
into productivity, composition and substitution effects, and changes in the task 
content of production. All technologies create productivity effects that contribute 
to labor demand. The composition effect arises from the reallocation of activity 
across sectors with different labor intensities. The substitution effect captures 
the substitution between labor- and capital-intensive tasks within an industry in 
response to a change in task prices (for instance, caused by factor-augmenting tech-
nologies making labor or capital more productive at tasks they currently perform). 
We estimate changes in the task content of production from residual changes in 
industry-level labor shares (beyond what can be explained by substitution effects). 
We further decompose changes in the task content of production into displace-
ment effects caused by automation and reinstatement effects driven by new tasks. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
6     Journal of Economic Perspectives
We provide external support for this decomposition by relating estimated changes 
in the task content of production to a battery of measures of automation and intro-
duction of new tasks across sectors.
Our decomposition suggests that the evolution of the US wage bill, especially 
over the last 20 years, cannot be understood without factoring in changes in the 
task content of production. In particular, we find that the sharp slowdown of US 
wage bill growth over the last three decades is a consequence of weaker-than-
usual productivity growth and significant shifts in the task content of production 
against labor. By decomposing the change in the task content of production, we 
estimate stronger displacement effects and considerably weaker reinstatement 
effects during the last 30 years than the decades before. These patterns hint at an 
acceleration of automation and a deceleration in the creation of new tasks. They 
also raise the question of why productivity growth has been so anemic while auto-
mation has accelerated during recent years. We use our framework to shed light 
on this critical question.
An online Appendix available with this paper at the journal website contains a 
more detailed exposition of our framework, proofs, additional empirical results, and 
details on the construction of our data. 
Conceptual Framework
Production requires the completion of a range of tasks. The production of a 
shirt, for example, starts with a design, then requires the completion of a variety of 
production tasks, such as the extraction of fibers, spinning them to produce yarn, 
weaving, knitting, dyeing, and processing, as well as additional nonproduction 
tasks, including accounting, marketing, transportation, and sales. Each one of these 
tasks can be performed by human labor or by capital (including both machines 
and software). The allocation of tasks to factors determines the task content of  
production. 
Automation enables some of the tasks previously performed by labor to be 
produced by capital. As a recent example, advances in robotics technologies since 
the 1980s have allowed firms to automate a wide range of production tasks in 
manufacturing, such as machining, welding, painting, and assembling, that were 
performed manually (Ayres and Miller 1983; Groover, Weiss, Nagel, and Odrey 
1986; Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018b). The set of tasks involved in producing a 
product is not constant over time, and the introduction of new tasks can be a major 
source of labor demand as well as productivity. In textiles, examples of new labor-
intensive tasks include computerized designs, new methods of market research, 
and various managerial activities for better targeting of demand and cost saving. By 
changing the allocation of tasks to factors, both automation and the introduction of 
new tasks affect the task content of production.
Tasks are thus the fundamental unit of production, and the factors of produc-
tion contribute to output by performing these tasks. In contrast, the canonical 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor     7
approach in economics bypasses tasks and directly posits a production function 
of the form Y = F (AK K, ALL), which additionally imposes that all technological 
change takes a factor-augmenting form. There are three related reasons we prefer 
our conceptual framework. First, the canonical approach lacks descriptive realism. 
Advances in robotics, for example, do not make capital or labor more productive, but 
expand the set of tasks that can be produced by capital. Second, capital-augmenting 
technological change (an increase in A
K ) or labor-augmenting technological change 
(an increase in AL) corresponds to the relevant factor becoming uniformly more produc-
tive in all tasks, which, we will show, ignores potentially important changes in the task 
content of production. Third, and most importantly, we will also see that the quan-
titative and qualitative implications of factor-augmenting technological advances 
are different from those of technologies that change the task content of produc-
tion. Focusing just on factor-augmenting technologies can force us into misleading  
conclusions.
Tasks and Production
We present our task-based framework by first describing the production process 
in a single-sector economy.2 Suppose that production combines the output of a range 
of tasks, and that the tasks are indexed by z and normalized to lie between N − 1 and 
N, as shown in Figure 1.3 Tasks can be produced using capital or labor. Tasks with 
z > I are not automated, and can only be produced with labor, which has a wage rate 
W. Tasks z ≤ I are automated and can be produced with capital, which has a rental 
rate R, as well as labor. We assume that labor has both a comparative and an absolute 
advantage in higher indexed tasks. An increase in I therefore represents the introduc-
tion of an automation technology, or automation for short. An increase in N , on the 
other hand, corresponds to the introduction of new labor-intensive tasks or new tasks 
for short. In addition to automation (I) and introduction of new tasks (N), the state 
of technology for this sector depends on A
L (labor-augmenting technology) and AK 
(capital-augmenting technology), which increase the productivities of these factors 
in all tasks. 
Let us assume that it is cost-minimizing for firms to use capital in all tasks that 
are automated (all z ≤ I ) and to adopt all new tasks immediately. This implies an 
allocation of tasks to factors as summarized in Figure 1, which also shows how auto-
mation and new tasks impact this allocation.
2 This also describes the production process in a sector situated in a multisector economy, with the only 
difference being that, in that case, changes in technology impact relative prices and induce reallocation 
of capital and labor across sectors. We discuss these relative price and reallocation effects below. 
3 Namely, the production function takes the form Y =    ( ∫ N−1  N    Y (z)     σ−1 ____ σ   )    
  σ ____ σ−1  
  , where Y(z) is the output of task 
z. The assumption that tasks lie between N − 1 and N is adopted to simplify the exposition. Nothing 
major changes if we instead allow tasks to lie on the interval between 0 and N . The online Appendix 
presents more detail on underlying assumptions and on derivations of results that follow throughout 
the discussion. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
8     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Following the same steps as in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018a), output can 
be represented as a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function of capital and 
labor: 
 Y = Π(I, N )   (Γ (I, N )     1 __ σ   ( ALL)   
  σ−1 ____ σ  
  + (1 – Γ (I, N ))     1 __ σ    (AKK)   
  σ−1 ____ σ  
 )    
  σ ____ σ−1  
   .
As in the canonical model, we have production as a function of the quantities 
of labor and capital, L and K. The labor-augmenting technology term A L and the 
capital-augmenting term AK increase the productivity of labor and capital in all tasks 
they currently produce. The elasticity of substitution between tasks, σ, determines 
how easy it is to substitute one task for another, and is also the (derived) elasticity of 
substitution between capital and labor. 
The crucial difference from the canonical model is that the share parameters 
of this constant-elasticity-of-substitution function depend on automation and new 
tasks. The share parameter for labor, Γ(I, N   ), is the labor task content of production, 
which represents the share of tasks performed by labor relative to capital (adjusted 
for differences in labor and capital productivity across these tasks). Conversely, 
1 − Γ(I, N   ) is the capital task content of production. Hence, an increase in Γ(I, N   )  
Source: Authors.
Note: The figure summarizes the allocation of tasks to capital and labor. Production requires the 
completion of a range of tasks, normalized to lie between N – 1 and N. Tasks above I are not automated, 
and can only be produced with labor. Tasks below I are automated and will be produced with capital. An 
increase in I represents the introduction of automation technology or automation for short. An increase 
in N corresponds to the introduction of new labor-intensive tasks or new tasks for short.
Figure 1 
The Allocation of Capital and Labor to the Production of Tasks and the Impact of 
Automation and the Creation of New Tasks

--- PAGE 7 ---
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo     9
shifts the task content of production in favor of labor and against capital. In the 
special case where σ = 1, Γ(I, N   ) = N − I. More generally, Γ(I, N   ) is always increasing 
in N and decreasing in I . This, in particular, implies that automation (greater I ) 
shifts the task content of production against labor because it entails capital taking 
over tasks previously performed by labor. In contrast, new labor-intensive tasks shift 
the task content of production in favor of labor.
4 Finally, automation and new tasks 
not only change the task content of production but also generate productivity gains 
by allowing the allocation of (some) tasks to cheaper factors. The term Π(I, N   ), 
which shows up as total factor productivity, represents these productivity gains.
The labor share, given by wage bill (WL ) divided by value added (Y  ), can be 
derived as:
   s   
L   =    1  ________________________   
1 +   1 − Γ(I, N   ) ___________ Γ(I, N   )     (  R/ A   K  _____ W/ A   L   )    
1−σ
 
     .
This relationship, which will be relied upon extensively in the rest of the paper, 
clarifies the two distinct forces shaping the labor share (in an industry or the entire 
economy). As is standard, the labor share depends on the ratio of effective factor 
prices, W/A
L and R/AK. Intuitively, as effective wages rise relative to effective rental 
rates of capital, the price of tasks produced by labor increases relative to the price 
of tasks produced by capital, and this generates a substitution effect across tasks. This 
is the only force influencing the labor share in the canonical model. Its magnitude 
and size depend on whether σ is greater than or less than 1. For example, when 
tasks are complements (σ < 1), an increase in the effective wage raises the cost share 
of tasks produced by labor. The opposite happens when σ > 1. When σ = 1, we obtain 
a Cobb–Douglas production function and the substitution effect vanishes because 
the share of each task in value added is fixed.
More novel are the effects of the task content of production, Γ(I, N   ), on the 
labor share. Intuitively, as more tasks are allocated to capital instead of labor, the 
task content shifts against labor and the labor share will decline unambiguously. 
Our model thus predicts that, independently from the elasticity of substitution 
σ, automation (which changes the task content of production against labor) will 
reduce the labor share in the industry, while new tasks (which alter the task content 
of production in favor of labor) will increase it.
4 Our exposition assumes that the task content of production does not depend on factor-augmenting 
technologies or the supply of capital or labor. This will be the case when it is cost-minimizing for firms in 
this sector to use capital in all tasks that are automated (all z ≤ I) and use all new tasks immediately. The 
online Appendix presents the underlying assumptions on technology and factor supplies that ensures 
this is the case. When this assumption does not hold (for example, because of very large changes in 
factor-augmenting technologies or factor supplies), the allocation of tasks to factors will change with 
factor supplies and factor-augmenting technologies. Even in this case, the impact of factor-augmenting 
technologies on the task content will be small relative to the productivity gains from these technologies.

--- PAGE 8 ---
10     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Technology and Labor Demand
We now investigate how technology changes labor demand. We focus on the 
behavior of the wage bill, WL , which captures the total amount employers pay for 
labor. Recall that 
Wage bill = Value added × Labor share.
Changes in the wage bill will translate into some combination of changes in employ-
ment and wages, and the exact division will be affected by the elasticity of labor 
supply and labor market imperfections, neither of which we model explicitly in this 
paper (for discussion, see Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018a, 2018b). 
We use this relationship to think about how three classes of technologies impact 
labor demand: automation, new tasks, and factor-augmenting advances. Consider 
the introduction of new automation technologies (an increase in I in Figure 1). The 
impact on labor demand can be represented as: 
Effect of automation on labor demand = Productivity effect 
 + Displacement effect.
The productivity effect arises from the fact that automation increases value added, and 
this raises the demand for labor from non-automated tasks. If nothing else happened, 
labor demand of the industry would increase at the same rate as value added, and the 
labor share would remain constant. However, automation also generates a displace -
ment effect—it displaces labor from the tasks previously allocated to it—which shifts 
the task content of production against labor and always reduces the labor share. 
Automation therefore increases the size of the pie, but labor gets a smaller slice. 
There is no guarantee that the productivity effect is greater than the displacement 
effect; some automation technologies can reduce labor demand even as they raise  
productivity.
5
Hence, contrary to a common presumption in popular debates, it is not the 
“brilliant” automation technologies that threaten employment and wages, but “so-so 
technologies” that generate small productivity improvements. This is because the posi-
tive productivity effect of so-so technologies is not sufficient to offset the decline in 
labor demand due to displacement. To understand when this is likely to be the case, 
let us first consider where the productivity gains from automation are coming from. 
These are not a consequence of the fact that capital and labor are becoming more 
productive in the tasks they are performing, but follow from the ability of firms to 
use cheaper capital in tasks previously performed by labor. The productivity effect of 
5 Indeed, in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018b), we show that industrial robots, a leading example of auto-
mation technology, are associated with lower labor share and labor demand at the industry level and 
lower labor demand in local labor markets exposed to this technology. This result is consistent with a 
powerful displacement effect that has dominated the productivity effect from this class of automation 
technologies.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor     11
automation is therefore proportional to cost-savings obtained from such substitution. 
The greater is the productivity of labor in tasks being automated relative to its wage 
and the smaller is the productivity of capital in these tasks relative to the rental rate of 
capital, the more limited the productivity gains from automation will be. Examples of 
so-so technologies include automated customer service, which has displaced human 
service representatives but is generally deemed to be low quality and thus unlikely to 
have generated large productivity gains. They may also include several of the applica-
tions of artificial intelligence technology to tasks that are currently challenging for 
machines.
Different technologies are accompanied by productivity effects of varying 
magnitudes, and hence, we cannot presume that one set of automation technolo-
gies will impact labor demand in the same way as others. Likewise, because the 
productivity gains of automation depend on the wage, the net impact of automa-
tion on labor demand will depend on the broader labor market context. When 
wages are high and labor is scarce, automation will generate a strong produc-
tivity effect and will tend to raise labor demand. When wages are low and labor 
is abundant, automation will bring modest productivity benefits and could end 
up reducing labor demand. This observation might explain why automation tech-
nologies adopted in response to the scarcity of (middle-aged) production workers 
in countries where the labor force is aging rapidly, such as Germany, Japan, and 
South Korea, appear to have more positive effects than in the United States (on 
cross-country patterns, see Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018e; on the effect of robots 
in the United States, see Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018b; in Germany, see Dauth, 
Findeisen, Suedekum, and Woessner 2018). It also suggests a reinterpretation of 
the famous Habakkuk hypothesis that the faster growth of the 19th-century US 
economy compared to Britain was due to its relative scarcity of labor (Habakkuk 
1962; for a similar argument in the context of the British Industrial Revolution, 
see also Allen 2009). Labor scarcity encourages automation, and the high wages 
it causes help explain why this automation process led to rapid productivity and 
further wage growth.
Consider next the effect of the introduction of new tasks on the wage bill, 
which is captured by an increase in N in our framework. This expands the set 
of tasks in which humans have a comparative advantage, and its effect can be  
summarized as:
Effect of new tasks on labor demand = Productivity effect 
 + Reinstatement effect.
The reinstatement effect captures the change in the task content of production, but 
now in favor of labor as the increase in N reinstates labor into new tasks. This change 
in task content always increases the labor share. It also improves productivity as new 
tasks exploit labor’s comparative advantage. The resulting productivity improve-
ment, together with the change in task content, ensures that labor demand always 
increases following the introduction of new tasks.

--- PAGE 10 ---
12     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Finally, as we claimed previously, the implications of factor-augmenting tech-
nologies are very different from those of automation and new tasks, because they do 
not change the task content of production. In particular,
Effect of factor-augmenting technologies on labor demand = Productivity effect
 + Substitution effect.
With factor-augmenting technological improvements, either labor or capital 
becomes more productive in all tasks, making the productivity effect proportional 
to their share in value added.
Factor-augmenting technologies also impact labor demand via the substitution 
effect introduced above, which changes the labor share but does not alter the task 
content of production. Available estimates of σ place this parameter to be less than 
but close to 1, which implies that the substitution effects of factor-augmenting tech-
nologies are small relative to their productivity effects. 
In summary, in contrast to automation and new tasks that can generate signifi-
cant displacement and reinstatement effects, factor-augmenting technologies affect 
labor demand mostly via the productivity effect and have a relatively small impact 
on the labor share. As a result, they are unlikely to generate a lower labor demand 
from technological advances: capital-augmenting technologies always increase labor 
demand, and labor-augmenting technologies do the same for plausible parameter 
values, in particular, so long as σ > 1 – s
L (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018c).6 
Tasks, Production, and Aggregate Labor Demand
We now embed the model of tasks and production in an economy with multiple 
industries and investigate how technology changes aggregate labor demand by 
characterizing the behavior of the (economy-wide) wage bill. In our multisector 
economy we have:
Wage bill = GDP ×    
∑  
i∈
  
 
     Labor share sector i × Share of value added in sector i.
The multisector perspective offers an additional margin for adjustment in 
response to automation, which we refer to as the composition effect . Following auto-
mation in sector i (an increase in I for that sector) we have:
Effect of automation in i on aggregate labor demand = Productivity effect
 + Displacement effect 
 + Composition effect.
6 Many other technologies share the feature that they do not impact the task content of production. For 
example, improvements in the quality or productivity of equipment in any subset of already-automated 
tasks in (N − 1, I ) (what, in Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018d, we call a “deepening of automation”) will 
have an impact on labor demand identical to capital-augmenting technologies. These technologies do 
not change the allocation of tasks to factors (as a new piece of equipment is replacing an older one), and 
so they affect labor demand mostly through the productivity effect.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo     13
The first two effects are the same as above—the productivity effect represents the 
impact of automation in sector i on GDP, while the displacement effect represents 
the change in the task content of production sector i (which affects the labor share 
within this sector). These effects are scaled by the size of sector i, since larger sectors 
will have larger aggregate effects.
The composition effect, which was absent when we were focusing on the 
effect of automation in a one-sector economy, captures the implications of sectoral 
reallocations (changes in the share of value-added across sectors). For example, 
automation in sector i may reallocate economic activity towards sector j (depending 
on demand elasticities and input-output linkages). This reallocation contributes 
positively to aggregate labor demand when sector j has higher labor share than the 
contracting sector i, and negatively when the opposite holds.
A similar decomposition applies to new tasks. Following the introduction of 
new tasks in sector i (an increase in N for that sector), we have:
Effect of new tasks in i on aggregate labor demand = Productivity effect
 + Reinstatement effect 
 + Composition effect,
where the new feature is again the composition effect.
The mechanization of agriculture in the United States illustrates how these 
forces jointly determine the behavior of aggregate labor demand. Data from Budd 
(1960) show that between 1850 and 1910, the replacement of manual labor by horse-
powered reapers and harvesters in agriculture coincided with a sharp decline in 
the labor share of value in this sector, from 33 to 17 percent—a telltale sign of the 
displacement effect created by mechanization. Meanwhile, despite rapid mechaniza-
tion of agriculture, at the time making up one-third of the US economy, two forces 
combined to generate an increase in aggregate labor demand. First, and in part 
as a consequence of mechanization, value-added and employment were reallocated 
from agriculture to the industrial sector. This created a powerful composition effect, 
as industry was (and still continues to be) much more labor intensive than agricul-
ture. In addition, the labor share within the industrial sector rose further during 
this process, from 47 percent in 1850 to 55 percent by 1890. This change in industry 
labor share signals the presence of a powerful reinstatement effect created by the 
introduction of new labor-intensive jobs in this sector. This interpretation is consis-
tent with significant growth in new factory jobs in farm equipment (Olmstead and 
Rhode 2001), cotton milling (Rasmussen 1982), and subsequently clerical occupa-
tions in trade and manufacturing industries (Goldin and Katz 2008; Michaels 2007).
Finally, the effects of factor-augmenting technologies in a multi-industry 
context can be analyzed similarly. Although they too generate composition effects 
and may affect aggregate labor demand via this channel, factor-augmenting tech-
nologies still have no impact on the task content of production. Absent powerful 
composition effects, they continue to affect labor demand mostly via their produc-
tivity effect.

--- PAGE 12 ---
14     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Sources of Labor Demand Growth in the United States
We now use our framework to shed light on the factors that have shaped 
the evolution of US labor demand since World War II. To do this, we develop a 
decomposition of observed changes in the total wage bill in the economy. Our 
decomposition requires data on industry value added, factor payments, and labor 
shares. The change in aggregate wage bill between two periods can be decomposed 
(as we show in the online Appendix) as:
Change in aggregate wage bill = Productivity effect + Composition effect 
 + Substitution effect + Change in task content.
The productivity effect is the sum of the contributions from various sources of 
technology to value added and thus GDP. Correspondingly, in our empirical exer -
cise we measure this effect using changes in (log) GDP per capita. 
The composition effect captures changes in labor demand resulting from  
reallocation of value added across sectors. As discussed in the previous section, this 
is related to the gap between the labor share of contracting and expanding sectors. 
In our empirical exercise, we measure it as the sum of the change in the value-added 
share of an industry weighted by its labor share (if all sectors had the same labor 
share, this term would be equal to zero). The composition effect includes not only 
the sectoral reallocation brought by new technologies but also changes in value 
added across sectors resulting from structural transformations and sectoral realloca-
tion due to preferences (for example, Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi 2013; 
Hubmer 2018; Aghion, Jones, and Jones 2017), differences in factor intensities (for 
example, Acemoglu and Guerrieri 2008), differential sectoral productivity growth 
(for example, Ngai and Pissarides 2007), or international trade in final goods (for 
example, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013). 
The substitution effect is an employment-weighted sum of the substitution 
effects of industries, and thus depends on industry-level changes in effective factor 
prices and the elasticity of substitution σ (as shown in the earlier expression for 
the labor share). To estimate the substitution effect in an industry, we choose as 
our baseline Oberfield and Raval’s (2014) estimate of the elasticity of substitution 
between capital and labor, σ = 0.8.
7 In addition, we utilize information on sectoral 
factor prices from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, and 
the national income and product accounts. To convert observed factor prices into 
effective ones, we start with a benchmark where   A  
i  L  /  A  i  K   grows at a common rate 
equal to average labor productivity, which we take to be 2 percent a year between 
7 We show in the online Appendix that the results are very similar for reasonable variations in σ. Note 
also that the relevant σ is the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor at the industry level. 
This is greater than the firm-level elasticity, estimated to be between 0.4 and 0.7 (for example, Chirinko, 
Fazzari, and Meyer 2011) because of output substitution between firms. Note also that our framework, in 
particular the central role of changes in the task content of production, makes it clear that this elasticity 
of substitution cannot be estimated from aggregate data. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor     15
1947 and 1987 and 1.46 percent a year between 1987 and 2017. The motivation for 
this choice is that, if all technological progress were labor-augmenting, this would 
be the rate of growth in   A  
i  L   required to match the behavior of labor productivity.8
The change in task content is given by an employment-weighted sum of the 
changes in task content of production of industries. We estimate industry-level 
change in task content as the residual change in labor share (observed directly in 
the data) that cannot be explained by the substitution effect. Namely,
Change in task content in i = Percent change in labor share in i 
 − Substitution effect in i.
Intuitively, with competitive factor and product markets, the change in task content 
of production and the substitution effect are the only forces affecting the labor 
share of an industry. Hence, changes in task content can be inferred once we have 
estimates of the substitution effect.
Under additional assumptions, we can also separate the change in task content 
into its two components: the displacement and reinstatement effects. Assume that an 
industry will not simultaneously undertake automation and introduce new tasks (this 
is implied, for example, by the directed technological change reasoning in Acemoglu 
and Restrepo 2018a, where depending on factor prices, an industry will engage in one 
type of innovation or the other). Then, when the labor share of an industry declines 
beyond what one would expect based on factor prices, we estimate a positive displace-
ment effect resulting from automation in that industry. Conversely, when the labor 
share in an industry rises beyond what one would expect based on factor prices, we 
estimate a positive reinstatement effect, attributed in our model to the introduction 
of new tasks. Motivated by this reasoning, we compute the displacement effect as the 
five-year moving average of the change in task content for industries with a negative 
change, and the reinstatement effect as the five-year moving average of the change 
in task content for industries with a positive change. The five-year time window is 
chosen to minimize the influence of measurement error in industry labor shares. To 
the extent that there are simultaneous introduction of new automation technologies 
and new tasks in a given industry within a five-year period, our estimates will be lower 
bounds both for the displacement and reinstatement effects. 
Sources of Labor Demand: 1947–1987
We first apply this decomposition to data from the four decades following 
World War II, from 1947 to 1987. For this period, we have data from the Bureau of 
8 Our estimates for the growth rate of   A  i  L  /  A  i  K   should be interpreted as upper bounds, since in general 
growth in GDP per worker will be driven not just by labor-augmenting technological changes. Because in 
our main exercise σ < 1, this implies that we are also understating the importance of displacement effects 
in reducing the task content of production. Nevertheless, reasonable variations on the growth rate of 
  A  
i  L  /  A  i  K   have small impacts on our decomposition results, as we show in the online Appendix.

--- PAGE 14 ---
16     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Economic Analysis for 58 industries on value added and labor shares.9 We combine 
these with data from the national income and product accounts on quantities of 
capital and labor in each industry to obtain measures of factor prices. We consoli-
date the data into 43 industries that covered the private sector and can be tracked 
consistently over time and across sources.
Figure 2 presents the evolution of the labor share for six broad sectors: construc-
tion, services, transportation, manufacturing, agriculture, and mining. Except for 
mining and transportation—two small sectors accounting for 10 percent of GDP—
there are no significant declines in labor shares in these broad sectors in this time 
period. In fact, the labor share in manufacturing and services increased modestly 
during this period. The bottom panel of the figure shows the evolution of the share 
of value added of these sectors and confirms the secular reallocation from manufac-
turing towards services starting in the late 1950s.
Figure 3 presents our decomposition using the 43 industries in our sample. 
We have divided the wage bill by population, so that changes in population do not 
confound the effects we are focusing on. The top panel in Figure 3 shows that wage 
bill per capita grew at 2.5 percent per year during this period. The rapid and steady 
growth of the wage bill during this period is largely explained by the productivity 
effect (2.4 percent per year). The substitution and composition effects are small, 
and during this period changes in the task content of production are small as well.
The middle panel of Figure 3 shows that, even though the overall change 
in the task content of production during this period is small, there is consider -
able displacement and reinstatement. Between 1947 and 1987, the displacement 
effect reduced labor demand at about 0.48 percent per year, but simultaneously, 
there was an equally strong reinstatement effect, equivalent to an increase in labor 
demand of 0.47 percent per year. The bottom panel of Figure 3 depicts a similar 
pattern in manufacturing, where the overall change in task content was also small, 
while displacement and reinstatement effects were substantial. In sum, our find-
ings suggest that during the four decades following World War II there was plenty 
of automation, but this was accompanied by the introduction of new tasks (or 
other changes increasing the task content of production in favor of labor) in both 
manufacturing and the rest of the economy that counterbalanced the adverse labor 
demand consequences of automation. 
Sources of Labor Demand: 1987–2017 
For the 1987–2017 period, we use data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis 
for 61 industries covering the private sector and complement them with data from 
9 Our measure of labor demand is given by the wage bill in the private sector and thus excludes self-
employment income. This avoids the need for apportioning self-employment income between labor 
and capital. Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin (2013) explore this issue in detail and conclude that labor income 
from self-employment has either declined or remained constant as a share of total labor income over this 
period. This implies that labor share inclusive of self-employment income likely declined by even more, 
and thus, if anything, focusing on the labor share in the private sector understates the overall decline in 
labor demand.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo     17
the Bureau of Labor Statistics on factor prices. The top panel of Figure 4 pres-
ents the evolution of the labor share for the same six broad sectors used above. In 
contrast to the 1947–1987 period, there is a sizable decline in the labor share in 
manufacturing and construction. The drop in the labor share for mining continues 
at a similar pace. The bottom panel of the figure shows the continued reallocation 
of economic activity from manufacturing to services.
The top panel of Figure 5 shows a striking slowdown in the growth of labor 
demand between 1987 and 2017. The wage bill per capita grew at a modest 
Manufacturing
Agriculture
Mining
Transportation
Construction
Services
Manufacturing
Mining
Transportation
Services
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987
A: Labor Share within Each Industry, 1947–1987
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987
B: Share of GDP by Industry, 1947–1987
Construction
Agriculture
Source: Authors using data from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis industry accounts.
Note: The top panel shows the labor share in value added in services, manufacturing, construction, 
transportation, mining and agriculture between 1947 and 1987, while the bottom panel shows the share 
of value added in these sectors relative to GDP. 
Figure 2 
The Labor Share and Sectoral Evolutions, 1947–1987

--- PAGE 16 ---
18     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Productivity effect
Composition effect
Substitution effect
Change in task content
Observed wage bill
0
20
40
60
80
100
1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987
A: Wage Bill, 1947–1987
Reinstatement
Displacement
Change in task content
−20
−10
0
10
20
1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987
B: Change in Task Content of Production, 1947–1987
Reinstatement
Displacement
Change in task content
−20
−10
0
10
20
1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987
C: Manufacturing Task Content of Production, 1947–1987
Source: Authors’ calculations.
Note: The top panel presents the decomposition of the wage bill divided by population between 1947 
and 1987. The middle and bottom panels present our estimates of the displacement and reinstatement 
effects for the entire economy and the manufacturing sector, respectively. See text for the details of the 
estimation of the changes in task content and displacement and reinstatement effects.
Figure 3 
Sources of Changes in Labor Demand, 1947–1987

--- PAGE 17 ---
Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor     19
1.33 percent per year during the entire period and essentially stagnated since 
2000. The first factor accounting for the deceleration of labor demand during this 
period is the slowdown of productivity growth (1.54 percent per year compared 
to 2.4 percent in 1947–1987). The second factor contributing to slower wage bill 
growth, especially after the late 1990s, is a significant negative shift in the task 
content of production against labor (of 0.35 percent per year), which caused labor 
Manufacturing
Agriculture
Mining
Transportation
Services
20
30
40
50
60
70
1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017
A: Labor Share within Each Industry, 1987–2017
Manufacturing
AgricultureMining
Transportation
Services
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017
B: Share of GDP by Industry, 1987–2017
Construction
Construction
Source: Authors using data from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis industry accounts and the Bureau 
of Labor Statistics.
Note: The top panel shows the labor share in value added in services, manufacturing, construction, 
transportation, mining, and agriculture between 1987 and 2017, while the bottom panel shows the share 
of value added in these sectors relative to GDP.
Figure 4 
The Labor Share and Sectoral Evolutions, 1987–2017

--- PAGE 18 ---
20     Journal of Economic Perspectives
demand to decouple from productivity. Cumulatively, changes in the task content of 
production reduced labor demand by 10 percent during this period.
The middle and bottom panels of Figure 5 show that, relative to the earlier 
period, the change in task content is driven by a deceleration in the introduction 
Productivity effect
Composition effect
Substitution effect
Change in task content
Observed wage bill
−10
0
10
20
30
40
1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017
A: Wage Bill, 1987–2017
Reinstatement
Displacement
Change in task content
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017
B: Change in Task Content of Production, 1987–2017
Reinstatement
Displacement
Change in task content
−30
−20
−10
0
10
1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017
C: Manufacturing Task Content of Production, 1987–2017
Source: Authors’ calculations.
Note: The top panel presents the decomposition of wage bill divided by population between 1987 and 
2017. The middle and bottom panels present our estimates of the displacement and reinstatement 
effects for the entire economy and the manufacturing sector, respectively. See text for the details of the 
estimation of the changes in task content and displacement and reinstatement effects.  
Figure 5 
Sources of Changes in Labor Demand, 1987–2017

--- PAGE 19 ---
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo     21
of technologies reinstating labor (reinstatement increased labor demand only by 
0.35 percent per year compared to 0.47 percent in 1947–1987) and an accelera-
tion of displacement (displacement reduced labor demand by 0.7 percent per year 
compared to 0.48 percent in 1947–1987). This pattern is particularly pronounced 
in manufacturing, where the displacement effect reduced labor demand at about 
1.1 percent per year or about 30 percent cumulatively. These results are consistent 
with Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin (2013), who document the important role of within-
industry changes that are uncorrelated with factor prices in accounting for the 
aggregate behavior of the labor share. The change in the balance between displace-
ment and reinstatement also corroborates the findings of Autor and Salomons 
(2018), who find that technological improvements after 1980 have been associated 
with declines in the labor share while those in the previous decades have not been.
Finally, the top panel also shows that the composition and substitution effects 
had a very limited impact on the wage bill. Although there is a sizable shift away from 
manufacturing, which is itself not unrelated to automation in this sector as well as to 
import competition, the resulting composition effects are small because the labor 
share in manufacturing is similar to that in the expanding service industries (see the 
top panel of Figure 4). These findings highlight that unlike the 19th-century mech-
anization of agriculture, there are no powerful composition effects contributing 
to labor demand. Even more importantly, there appears to be no equivalent of the 
powerful reinstatement effects that accompanied the mechanization of agriculture.
In summary, the deceleration of labor demand growth over the last 30 years is 
due to a combination of anemic productivity growth and adverse shifts in the task 
contents of production owing to rapid automation that is not being counterbal-
anced by the creation of new tasks.
10 
What Does the Change in Task Content Capture?
A natural concern is that our estimates of the change in task content capture 
something different than what might commonly be understood as displacement 
effects from automation technologies and reinstatement effects of new tasks. Here, 
we provide additional evidence that our estimates are informative about changes in 
the task content of production. We focus on the 1987–2017 period where we have 
measures of automation and can compute proxies for new tasks at the industry 
10 In the online Appendix, we verify that this pattern is robust to different values of the elasticity of 
substitution and to reasonable variations in the rates of factor-augmenting technological changes. 
Furthermore, we computed the changes in factor-augmenting technologies at the industry level that 
would be necessary to explain changes in industry labor shares without any change in task content of 
production. We found that this would require gargantuan changes in factor-augmenting technologies 
and productivity increases—several multiples larger than the observed increases in total factor produc-
tivity during the last seven decades. This exercise underscores the need for major changes in the task 
content of production to account for the evolution of sectoral labor shares and the wage bill. We also 
demonstrate in the online Appendix that the order in which the decomposition is carried out (composi-
tion effects first and within-industry changes next) does not matter for the results. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
22     Journal of Economic Perspectives
level, and then document the correlation between these measures and our esti-
mates of the change in the task content of production.
We have three measures of industry-level automation technologies. The 
proxies are: 1) the adjusted penetration of robots measure from Acemoglu and 
Restrepo (2018b) for 19 industries, which are then mapped to our 61 industries;  
2) the share of routine jobs in an industry in 1990, where we define routine jobs 
in an occupation as in Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and then project these across 
industries according to the share of the relevant occupation in the employment of 
the industry in 1990 (see also vom Lehn 2018); and 3) the share of firms (weighted 
by employment) across 148 detailed manufacturing industries using automation 
technologies, which include automatic guided vehicles, automatic storage and 
retrieval systems, sensors on machinery, computer-controlled machinery, program-
mable controllers, and industrial robots.
11
Table 1 reports the estimates of the relationship between the change in task 
content of production between 1987 and 2017 and the proxies for automation tech-
nologies and new tasks; each row and column corresponds to a different regression 
model. The table shows that with all these proxies there is the expected negative 
relationship between higher levels of automation and our measure of changes in 
the task content of production in favor of labor (see also visual representations of 
these relationships in the online Appendix). These negative relationships remain 
very similar when we add various control variables, including, in column 1, a 
dummy for the manufacturing sector and, in column 2, imports from China (the 
growth of final goods imports from China as in Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013; 
Acemoglu, Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Price 2016) and a measure of offshoring of 
intermediate goods (Feenstra and Hanson 1999; Wright 2014). Consistent with our 
conceptual framework, changes in task content are unrelated to imports of final 
goods from China, but are correlated with offshoring, which often involves the 
offshoring of labor-intensive tasks (Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin 2013). Controlling for 
offshoring does not change the relationship we report in Table 1 because offshoring 
is affecting a different set of industries than our measures of automation (see the 
online Appendix). 
We also looked at a series of proxies for the introduction of new tasks across 
industries, and how they are correlated with our measure of the change in task 
content for 1987–2017. Our four proxies for new tasks are: 1) the 1990 share of 
employment in occupations with a large fraction of new job titles, according to the 
1991 Dictionary of Occupational Titles compiled by Lin (2011); 2) the 1990 share of 
employment in occupations with a large number of “emerging tasks” according to 
O*NET, which correspond to tasks that workers identify as becoming increasingly 
11 These data are from the Survey of Manufacturing Technologies, and are available in 1988 and 1993 
for 148 four-digit SIC industries which are all part of the following three-digit manufacturing sectors: 
fabricated metal products; nonelectrical machinery, electric and electronic equipment; transportation 
equipment; and instruments and related products (Doms, Dunne, and Troske 1997). For this exercise, 
we computed measures for the change in task content of these four-digit manufacturing industries using 
detailed data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis input-output tables for 1987 to 2007. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor     23
Table 1 
Relationship between Change in Task Content of Production and Proxies for 
Automation and New Tasks
Raw  
data
Controlling for 
manufacturing
Controlling for 
Chinese import  
and offshoring
(1) (2) (3)
Proxies for automation technologies:
 Adjusted penetration of robots, 1993–2014 −1.404 −0.985 −1.129
(0.377) (0.369) (0.362)
 Observations 61 61 61
 R2 0.18 0.21 0.27
 Share of routine jobs in industry, 1990 −0.394 −0.241 −0.321
(0.122) (0.159) (0.164)
 Observations 61 61 61
 R2 0.14 0.19 0.27
 Share of firms using automation −0.390 −0.397
  technologies, 1988–1993 (SMT data) (0.165) (0.166)
 Observations 148 148
 R2 0.08 0.09
Proxies for new tasks:
 Share of new job titles, based on 1991 DOT* 1.609 1.336 1.602
  and 1990 employment by occupation (0.523) (0.530) (0.541)
 Observations 61 61 61
 R
2 0.12 0.23 0.32
 Number of emerging tasks, based on 1990 8.423 7.108 7.728
  employment by occupation (2.261) (2.366) (2.418)
 Observations 61 61 61
 R2 0.14 0.25 0.33
 Share of employment growth between 1990 2.121 1.638 1.646
  and 2016 in new occupations (0.723) (0.669) (0.679)
 Observations 61 61 61
 R2 0.08 0.20 0.26
 Percent increase in number of occupations 0.585 0.368 0.351
  represented in industry (0.156) (0.207) (0.215)
 Observations 61 61 61
 R2 0.14 0.19 0.25
Source: Authors.
Note: The table reports estimates of the relationship between the change in task content of production 
between 1987 and 2017 and proxies for automation technologies and new tasks. Each row and column 
corresponds to a different regression model.  Column 1 reports estimates of the bivariate relationship 
between change in task content of production and the indicated proxy at the industry level. Column 2 
includes a dummy for manufacturing industries as a control. In addition, Column 3 controls for the increase 
in Chinese imports (defined as the increase in imports relative to US consumption between 1991 and 2011, 
as in Acemoglu et al. 2016) and the increase in offshoring (defined as the increase in the share of imported 
intermediates between 1993 and 2007, as in Feenstra and Hanson 1999). Except for the third row, which 
uses the Survey of Manufacturing Technologies (SMT), all regressions are for the 61 industries used in our 
analysis of the 1987–2017 period. When using the SMT, the regressions are for 148 detailed manufacturing 
industries. Standard errors robust against heteroskedasticity are in parenthesis. When using the measure of 
robot penetration, we cluster standard errors at the 19 industries for which this measure is available.
* The DOT is the Dictionary of Occupational Titles.

--- PAGE 22 ---
24     Journal of Economic Perspectives
important in their jobs; 3) the share of employment growth in an industry accounted 
for by “new occupations,” defined as occupations that were not present in that industry 
in 1990 but are present in 2016; and 4) the percent increase in the number of occu-
pations in an industry between 1990 and 2016. The first two measures are projected 
onto industries using the share of these occupations in industry employment in 1990. 
All four of these measures are meant to capture major changes in the types of activi-
ties performed in occupations (then mapped to industries) or the introduction of 
certain new activities into an industry. We thus expect the correlations between these 
proxies for new tasks and our measure of changes in task content in favor of labor to 
be positive and significant, and they are. These results hold regardless of whether or 
not we include additional controls in columns 2 and 3 of Table 1.
These correlations bolster the interpretation that our estimates of changes in 
task content of production contain valuable information on displacement from 
automation technologies and reinstatement from the introduction of new tasks.
Confounding Factors
Our approach has been predicated on competitive markets and has also 
abstracted from various other changes potentially affecting US labor markets. We 
now briefly discuss these issues.
First, as we have already noted, trade in final goods should have no impact 
on our estimates of the change in the task content of production (because they 
will affect prices and sales, which are captured by our productivity effect, and they 
induce sectoral reallocations, which are part of our composition effects). This is 
confirmed by our results in Table 1. Offshoring, on the other hand, will directly 
change the task content of production because it involves the replacement of some 
labor-intensive tasks by services from abroad (Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008). 
Our estimates in Table 1 are consistent with this, but also show that offshoring does 
not change the quantitative or qualitative relationship between various measures 
of automation and our estimates of the change in the task content of production.
Second, as also noted above, sectoral reallocations resulting from structural 
transformation do not affect the task content of production either and are part of 
our composition effects. The fact that these composition effects are small suggests 
that these sectoral reallocations have not been a major factor in the slowdown in 
labor demand and changes in labor share in national income.
Third, we have abstracted from the presence of workers with different skills, and 
thus a potential question is whether changes in the skill composition of the work-
force would affect our estimates of the change in the task content of production. 
The answer is “no,” provided that industry-level factor payments are well-measured. 
Hence, as long as the increase in the wage bill caused by skill upgrading in a sector 
is factored in, this compositional change does not cause a shift in the task content 
of production. An implication is that secular changes such as population aging and 
increased female labor force participation, though they will affect the composition 
of the workforce and factor prices, should not confound our estimates of changes 
in task content of production.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo     25
Fourth, changes in factor supplies should also have no impact provided that 
our estimates of the substitution effect (which form the basis of our estimates of the 
change in the task content of production) remain accurate. 
In contrast to these factors, deviations from competitive labor or product 
markets would potentially confound our estimates of task content. Particularly 
worth noting are deviations from competitive labor markets. If the supply side of the 
market is determined by bargaining or other rent-sharing arrangements, then our 
approach still remains valid provided that firms are on their labor demand curve 
(for overall labor or for different types of labor in the presence of heterogeneity). 
This is because our analysis only uses information from the labor demand side, 
so whether workers are along a well-defined labor supply curve is not important. 
On the other hand, changes in the extent of monopsony and bilateral bargaining 
and holdup problems forcing firms off their labor demand curve would potentially 
confound our estimates. A similar confounding would result if there are changing 
product market markups. Though these issues are important, they are beyond 
the scope of the current paper and are some of the issues we are investigating in 
ongoing work. 
What Explains the Changing Nature of Technology and Slow Productivity Growth 
Since 1987?
Our results suggest that it is the combination of adverse shifts in the task 
content of production—driven by accelerated automation and decelerating  
 reinstatement—and weak productivity growth that accounts for the sluggish growth 
of labor demand over the last three decades and especially since 2000. Why has the 
balance between automation and new tasks changed recently? Why has productivity 
growth been so disappointing despite the acceleration in automation technologies? 
Though we do not have complete answers to these questions, our conceptual frame-
work points to a number of ideas worth considering.
There are two basic reasons why the balance between automation and new 
tasks may have changed. First, the innovation possibilities frontier linking these two 
types of technological change may have shifted, facilitating further automation and 
making the creation of new tasks more difficult (for a formal analysis, see Acemoglu 
and Restrepo 2018a). For example, new general-purpose technologies based on 
advances in hardware and software may have made further automation cheaper, or 
we may have run out of ideas for generating new high-productivity (labor-intensive) 
tasks. We find a second reason for a change in this balance more plausible: that 
is, the US economy may have moved along a given innovation possibilities fron-
tier because incentives for automation have increased and those for creating new 
tasks have declined. Several factors may push in this direction. The US tax code 
aggressively subsidizes the use of equipment (for example, via various tax credits 
and accelerated amortization) and taxes the employment of labor (for example, via 
payroll taxes). A tendency towards further (and potentially excessive) automation 
may have been reinforced by the growing focus on automation and use of artifi-
cial intelligence for removing the human element from most of the production 

--- PAGE 24 ---
26     Journal of Economic Perspectives
process. This focus has recently been boosted both by the central role that large 
tech companies have come to play in innovation with their business model based 
on automation and small workforces, and by the vision of many of the luminaries 
of the tech world (think of the efforts of Tesla to automate production extensively, 
which turned out to be very costly). Finally, the declining government support for 
innovation may have also contributed by discouraging research with longer hori-
zons, which likely further disadvantaged the creation of new tasks (which bear fruit 
more slowly) relative to automation.
This list of factors may contribute not just to the changing balance between 
automation and new tasks, but also to the slowdown in productivity growth. First, 
because new tasks contribute to productivity, slower reinstatement will be associated 
with slower productivity growth. Therefore, factors tilting the balance against new 
tasks likely translate into lost opportunities for improved productivity. In addition, 
slower wage growth resulting from a weak reinstatement effect indirectly makes auto-
mation less productive—because productivity gains from automation are increasing 
in the effective wage in tasks being replaced, and lower wages thus reduce these 
productivity gains. Second, if innovations in both automation and new tasks are 
subject to diminishing returns (within a given period of time or over time), a signifi-
cant change in the balance between these two types of new technologies will push us 
towards more marginal developments and cause slower productivity growth. Third, 
as we emphasized earlier, productivity gains from automation could be quite small 
for so-so technologies—when automation substitutes for tasks in which labor was 
already productive and capital is not yet very effective. In this light, further automa-
tion, especially when it is induced by tax distortions or excessive enthusiasm about 
automating everything, would take the form of such so-so technologies and would 
not bring much in productivity gains. Finally, in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018d), 
we suggest there may be a mismatch between the available skills of the workforce 
and the needs for new technologies. This could further reduce productivity gains 
from automation and hamper the introduction of new tasks, because the lack of 
requisite skills reduces the efficiency with which new tasks can be utilized. 
If the balance between automation and new tasks has shifted inefficiently and if 
indeed this is contributing to rapid automation, the absence of powerful reinstate-
ment effects, and the slowdown of productivity growth, then there may be room for 
policy interventions to improve both job creation and productivity growth. These 
interventions might include removing incentives for excessive automation (such as 
the preferential treatment of capital equipment) and implementing new policies 
designed to rebalance the direction of technological change (for a more detailed 
discussion in the context of artificial intelligence, see Acemoglu and Restrepo 2019).
Concluding Remarks
This paper develops a task-based model to study the effects of different tech-
nologies on labor demand. At the center of our framework is the task content of 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Automation and New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor     27
production—measuring the allocation of tasks to factors of production. Automa-
tion, by creating a displacement effect, shifts the task content of production against 
labor, while the introduction of new tasks in which labor has a comparative advan-
tage improves it via the reinstatement effect. These technologies are qualitatively 
different from factor-augmenting ones, which do not impact the task content of 
production. For example, automation always reduces the labor share and may 
reduce labor demand, and new tasks always increase the labor share.
We then show how changes in the task content of production and other contrib-
utors to labor demand can be inferred from data on labor shares, value added, and 
factor prices at the industry level. The main implication of our empirical exercise 
using this methodology is that the recent stagnation of labor demand is explained 
by an acceleration of automation, particularly in manufacturing, and a deceleration 
in the creation of new tasks. In addition, and perhaps reflecting this shift in the 
composition of technological advances, the economy also experienced a marked 
slowdown in productivity growth, contributing to sluggish labor demand.
Our framework has clear implications for the future of work, too. Our evidence 
and conceptual approach support neither the claims that the end of human work 
is imminent nor the presumption that technological change will always and every-
where be favorable to labor. Rather, they suggest that if the origin of productivity 
growth in the future continues to be automation, the relative standing of labor, 
together with the task content of production, will decline. The creation of new 
tasks and other technologies raising the labor intensity of production and the labor 
share are vital for continued wage growth commensurate with productivity growth. 
Whether such technologies will be forthcoming depends not just on our innovation 
capabilities but also on the supply of different skills, demographic changes, labor 
market institutions, government policies including taxes and research and devel-
opment spending, market competition, corporate strategies, and the ecosystem of 
innovative clusters. We have pointed out some reasons why the balance between 
automation and new tasks may have become inefficiently tilted in favor of the 
former—with potentially adverse implications for jobs and productivity—and some 
directions for policy interventions to redress this imbalance.

--- PAGE 26 ---
28     Journal of Economic Perspectives
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. 
“Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for 
Employment and Earnings.” Chap. 12 in Handbook 
of Labor Economics, vol. 4, Part B, edited by David 
Card and Orley Ashenfelter. Elsevier. 
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, 
Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price. 2016. 
“Import Competition and the Great US Employ-
ment Sag of the 2000s.” Journal of Labor Economics 
34(S1): S141–S198. 
Acemoglu, Daron, and Veronica Guer-
rieri. 2008. “Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced 
Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy  
116(3): 476–98.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2018a. 
“The Race Between Machine and Man: Implica-
tions of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and 
Employment.” American Economic Review 108(6): 
1488–1542.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 
2018b. “Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor 
Markets.” NBER Working Paper 23285.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2018c. 
“Modeling Automation.” AEA Papers and Proceed-
ings, 108: 48–53.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 
2018d. “Artificial Intelligence, Automation and 
Work.” NBER Working Paper 24196.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2018e. 
“Demographics and Automation.” NBER Working 
Paper 24421.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual 
Restrepo.  2019.  “The Wrong Kind of AI? 
Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Labor 
Demand.” NBER Working Paper 25682.
Aghion, Philippe, Benjamin F. Jones, and 
Charles I. Jones. 2017. “Artificial Intelligence and 
Economic Growth.” NBER Working Paper 23928.
Allen, Robert C. 2009. The British Industrial 
Revolution in Global Perspective. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. 
Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor 
Market Effects of Import Competition in the 
United States.” American Economic Review 103(6): 
2121–68.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. 
Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent 
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1279–1333.
Autor, David, and Anna Salomons. 2018. “Is 
Automation Labor Share–Displacing? Productivity 
Growth, Employment, and the Labor Share.” 
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, pp. 1–87. 
Ayres, Robert U., and Steven M. Miller. 1983. 
Robotics: Applications and Social Implications.  Ball-
inger Publishing Company.
Budd, Edward C. 1960. “Factor Shares, 
1850–1910.” Chap. 9 in Trends in the American 
Economy in the Nineteenth Century . Princeton 
University Press.
Chandler, Alfred D. 1977. The Visible Hand: 
The Managerial Revolution in American Business.  
Harvard University Press.
Chirinko, Robert C., Steven M. Fazzari, and 
Andrew P. Meyer. 2011. “A New Approach to 
Estimating Production Function Parameters: The 
Elusive Capital–Labor Substitution Elasticity.” 
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29(4): 
587–94.
Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, Jens 
Suedekum, and Nicole Woessner. 2018. “Adjusting 
to Robots: Worker-Level Evidence.” Institute 
Working Paper 13, Opportunity and Inclusive 
Growth Institute.
Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne, and Kenneth R. 
Troske. 1997. “Workers, Wages, and Technology.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 253–90.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ays ¸egül 
Sahin. 2013. “The Decline of the U.S. Labor 
Share.” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity no. 2, 
pp. 1–63.
Feenstra, Robert, and Gordon Hanson. 1999. 
“The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology 
Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 
1979–1990.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3): 
907–40.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. 
The Race between Education and Technology. Belknap 
Press. 
Graetz, Georg, and Guy Michaels. 2018. 
“Robots at Work.” Review of Economics and Statistics 
100(5): 753–68. 
Groover, Mikell P., Mitchell Weiss, Roger N. 
Nagel, and Nicholas G. Odrey. 1986. Industrial 
Robotics: Technology, Programming and Applications. 
McGraw-Hill Inc.
Grossman, Gene M., and Esteban Rossi-
Hansberg. 2008. “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory 
of Offshoring.” American Economic Review 98(5): 
1978–97. 
Habakkuk, John H. 1962. American and British 
Technology in the Nineteenth Century: The Search for 
Labor-Saving Inventions . Cambridge University 
Press. 
Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and 
Ákos Valentinyi. 2013. “Two Perspectives on Prefer-
ences and Structural Transformation.” American 
References 

--- PAGE 27 ---
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo     29
Economic Review 103(7): 2752–89.
Hubmer, Joachim. 2018. “The Race Between 
Preferences and Technology.” Unpublished paper, 
Yale University.
Lin, Jeffrey. 2011. “Technological Adaptation, 
Cities, and New Work.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 93(2): 554–74.
Mantoux, Paul. 1928. The Industrial Revolution 
in the Eighteenth Century: An Outline of the Beginnings 
of the Modern Factory System in England. Jonathan 
Cape, Ltd.
Michaels, Guy. 2007. “The Division of Labor, 
Coordination, and the Demand for Information 
Processing.” CEPR Discussion Paper 6358.
Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Techno -
logical Creativity and Economic Progress.  Oxford 
University Press: New York.
Ngai, L. Rachel, and Christopher A. Pissa-
rides.  2007.  “Structural Change in a Multisector 
Model of Growth.” American Economic Review  
97(1): 429–43.
Oberfield, Ezra, and Devesh Raval. 2014. 
“Micro Data and Macro Technology.” NBER 
Working Paper 20452
Olmstead, Alan, and Paul Rhode. 2001. 
“Reshaping the Landscape: The Impact and 
Diffusion of the Tractor in American Agriculture, 
1910–1960.” Journal of Economic History 61(3): 
663–98.
Rasmussen, Wayne D. 1982. “The Mechaniza-
tion of Agriculture.” Scientific American  247(3): 
76–89.
vom Lehn, Christian. 2018. “Understanding the 
Decline in the U.S. Labor Share: Evidence from 
Occupational Tasks.” European Economic Review  
108: 191–220.
Wright, Greg. 2014. “Revisiting the Employ-
ment Impact of Offshoring.” European Economic 
Review 66: 63–83.
Zeira, Joseph. 1998. “Workers, Machines, and 
Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
113(4): 1091–1117. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
30     Journal of Economic Perspectives